



 



The 5 Knitting Styles (And How to Knit Them) | AllFreeKnitting.com



 
























 




 























































 









                


















 



 











close


Advanced Pattern Search










Search Term

Enter a search term (optional)




Categories

Select One (optional)

All
Learn to Knit
Accessories
Baby Knits
Bags
Children's Knits
Cowls
Felted Knits
Fingerless Gloves Knitting Patterns
Free Afghan Knitting Patterns
Gifts
Hats
Home Decor
Knitting Charities
Knitting Companies
Knitting Designers
Loom Patterns
Men's Knits
Miscellaneous
Mittens
Motifs
Patterns for the Holidays
Pet Knits
Reviews
Scarves
Shawls
Socks
Sweaters
Tops
Toys
Vests




Printable

(optional)
 Show only printer-friendly patterns




Difficulty Level


Select One (optional)

All
Beginner
Intermediate
Advanced
Easy
Kid Friendly




Yarn Weight


Select One (optional)

All
(6) Super Bulky/Super Chunky (4-11 stitches for 4 inches)
(5) Bulky/Chunky (12-15 stitches for 4 inches)
(4) Medium Weight/Worsted Weight and Aran (16-20 stitches to 4 inches)
(3) Light/DK (21-24 stitches to 4 inches)
(2) Fine (23-26 stitches to 4 inches)
(1) Super Fine (27-32 stitches to 4 inches)
(0) Lace (33-40 stitches to 4 inches). Includes crochet thread.
Other
(7) Jumbo




Knitting Needle Size


Select as many as you like (optional)
 1 or 2.25 mm
2 or 2.75 mm
3 or 3.25 mm
4 or 3.5 mm
5 or 3.75 mm
6 or 4 mm
7 or 4.5 mm
8 or 5 mm
9 or 5.5 mm
10 or 6 mm
10.5 or 6.5 mm
11 or 8 mm
13 or 9 mm
15 or 10 mm
17 or 12.75 mm
19 or 15 mm
35 or 19 mm
50 or 25 mm
Circular Knitting Needles
Double-Pointed Knitting Needles (DPNs)
 


























Advanced Pattern Search







 
							Register Now 
							My Knitting Patterns 
							Subscribe 
							Sign In 











Menu







SubscribeFree eBooksGiveawaysHow TosCollectionsSubmit Your ProjectProject of the DayWrite for Us














	Popular Free Knitting Patterns




Knitting for BeginnersKnit Cowl PatternsEasy Knitting PatternsKnitting for Babies 


Categories





    					    Learn to Knit    					                            

Tips and Tricks
Video Tutorials





    					    Accessories    					                            

Boot Cuffs
Headbands
Knit Belts
Knit Jewelry





    					    Baby Knits    					                            

Baby Blankets
Baby Sets
Baby Sweater Knitting Patterns
Booties
Free Baby Hat Knitting Patterns





    					    Bags    					                            

Tote





    					    Children's Knits    					                            

Children's Knit Gloves and Mittens
Children's Knit Scarves
Children's Knitted Sweater Patterns
Knit Children's Hats





    					    Cowls    					                            

Neck Warmers





    					    Felted Knits    					                            

Felted Bags





    					    Fingerless Gloves Knitting Patterns    					                            

Gloves
Wrist Warmers





    					    Free Afghan Knitting Patterns    					                            

Cable Afghans
Knit Throws




    					    Gifts    					                            




    					    Hats    					                            

Cable Hats
Earflap Hats
Knit Berets
Ribbed Hats





    					    Home Decor    					                            

Baskets
Bath Knits
Dishcloths and Washcloths
Kitchen and Dining
Pillows
Potholders
Rugs




    					    Knitting Charities    					                            



    					    Knitting Companies    					                            



    					    Knitting Designers    					                            




    					    Loom Patterns    					                            

Loom Hats
Loom Scarves
Loom Socks
Loom Wraps





    					    Men's Knits    					                            

Gloves and Mittens
Hats
Scarves
Sweaters and Vests





    					    Miscellaneous    					                            

Collections




    					    Mittens    					                            



    					    Motifs    					                            




    					    Patterns for the Holidays    					                            

4th of July Knits
Christmas Knits
Easter Knits
Halloween Knits
St. Patrick's Day Knits
Thanksgiving Knits
Valentine's Day Knits





    					    Pet Knits    					                            

Dog Sweaters





    					    Reviews    					                            

Book Reviews
Product Reviews





    					    Scarves    					                            

Infinity Scarves





    					    Shawls    					                            

Knit Ponchos





    					    Socks    					                            

Cable Socks
Knit Leg Warmers
Slippers





    					    Sweaters    					                            

Cardigans
Shrugs and Boleros





    					    Tops    					                            

Tanks





    					    Toys    					                            

Amigurumi




    					    Vests    					                            









Latest Comments

Lisa
"Actually it could easily be modified and done in one piece. To do so, follow the directions for the back, when it says to bind off the piece-don't,  figure out how many stitches are needed to create the head opening, it's 7" or 8" depending on the size you make, cast those stitches off and work the second side separately with another ball of yarn.  On the flip side work to the bound off stitches and cast on as many as you cast off continue working the pattern in reverse.  When you get to the section to cast on for sleeves, is where you will bind off, since you already have the sleeves and carry on to finish sweater and bind off. Hope this helps, happy knitting."


see all comments


reply




Lisa
"I found error(s) in the pattern and no way to contact the designer to ask for an errata."


see all comments


reply




Lisa
"Looks like a nice project, however the patterns from this website that are featured are frequently missing so much essential information, that some of them are useless.   The website for the yarn has to be translated and the translation to english is not great, so proves to be more than a little frustrating."


see all comments


reply




Lisa
"There is no "book" you must click on the link to see the pattern on the page it links to.  After you get to the page, you need to scroll down about 1/3 of the page to find the written pattern there.  Hope this helps, happy knitting."


see all comments


reply




Lisa
"Sorry, I don't know of a video for that stitch pattern.  I did make this project about 10 or so years ago and I remember that it did not really look like the picture until it was completed, while it was on the needles it looked like it wasn't lining up.  Is it possible that is what is happening with you?"


see all comments


reply





 
  




Home > Learn to Knit > The 5 Knitting Styles (And How to Knit Them)		



 
The 5 Knitting Styles (And How to Knit Them)
Sometimes referred to as knitting holds, these five knitting styles are distinct from knitting methods. Some of them might even help you knit faster!

By: Toby Kuhnke, Editor, AllFreeKnitting.com




 Updated December 28, 2022                 

You must be logged in to add a private note. Login | Register


My Notes







My Notes

ONLY YOU see your private notes.
































Save
			    



Remove
			    



    			    More

































Share This Link







We are adding the pattern to your Knitting Patterns.
This pattern has been saved to My Knitting Patterns.
Click here to view your Knitting Patterns.
You must be logged in to save a pattern. Login | Register










 


Everyone's knitting style is a little different. Whether it's tension, your personal knitting gauge, or the way you wrap your yarn around your fingers. But when it comes to which hand you hold your yarn in, the knitting world is pretty divided.

There are five basic knitting styles based on the way the yarn is held and wrapped around the working needle.

The names of these styles often are associated with nationalities, like English knitting or Irish Cottage style, but the style you prefer has very little to do with where you grew up, or even where you learned to knit.

There are people in England and the United States who do not knit English (also called American) style, and there are plenty of people in continental Europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non-dominant hand, as is done in continental knitting. Likewise, Portuguese knitting is done all over the world, but the name "Portuguese" is just the name that stuck. Because of this, you will see that almost every single one of these knitting styles has two or more alternate names. 






 




English Knitting (Throwing) 

Other Names: American, French (in Japan)

What Is English Knitting?
English knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand, alongside the working needle. While it is common in the British Isles and North America, English knitting is practiced by knitters all over the world and is probably the most common. In a survey of just under 300 AllFreeKnitting readers, more than 60% said they knit English style. 
 


Continental Knitting (Picking) 

Other Names: German, European

What Is Continental Knitting?
Continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non-dominant hand. Many knitters find this method a lot quicker, and crocheters who are learning how to knit often find continental feels more natural in their hands. Roughly 30% of the knitters from the survey mentioned above knit continental.

Because this style holds the yarn in the non-dominant hand, there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling. Instead, the yarn is either placed above or below the needle in the non-dominant hand.

Variations on Continental Style

Norwegian Knitting
The Norwegian style of knitting is distinct because of the way purl stitches are worked. The Norwegian purl is worked with the yarn in back; patterns that switch back and forth between knitting and purling, like rib stitches, are great for practicing the Norwegian purl. This particular hold puts the working yarn in the non-dominant hand, which makes it a variant of continental; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style. This video for how to knit the Norwegian purl is a great way to learn this fun and useful technique.

Russian Knitting
Russian knitting is very similar to regular continental, and the knit and purl stitches themselves are worked in the same way. The only distinction with Russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non-dominant hand, very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg. This makes Russian style a very tight hold that allows you to flick the yarn over the tip of the needle instead of picking it with the needle itself. This style is similar to lever knitting (see below) with the yarn in the non-dominant hand. 
 


Lever Knitting (Flicking) 

Other Names: Peruvian, Catholic, Australian, Irish Cottage

What Is Lever Knitting?
Lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely, creating a sort of back-and-forth levering motion.

Many knitters who use this style hold their working needle like a pencil, which frees up their pointer finger to hold the tension of their yarn and "flick" it around the end of the needle. Stephanie Pearl-McPhee, also known as the Yarn Harlot, famously uses this technique to knitting at lightning fast speeds. 
 


Portuguese Knitting 

Other Names: Despite the fact that Portuguese knitting is done around the world and is less tied to a specific location than any other style of knitting, Portuguese knitting does not have any other common names.

What Is Portuguese Knitting?
Portuguese knitting is an especially unique knitting hold because the tension of the yarn is not held in the hands at all. Instead, Portuguese knitters wrap the yarn around the back of their necks.

The reason so many knitters like this style is that it frees up the fingers for speed. In every other knitting style, the tension is held in the hands; this gives your hands two jobs to do at the same time -- holding the yarn and working the stitches with the needles. When the tension is held around the neck, there's one less thing you have to worry about when making your stitches.

This technique is also great for helping with knitting pain because so much of the stress in the hands comes from holding the yarn. If knitting with the yarn around your neck is a little too out of the box for you, you can also get a Portuguese knitting pin that attaches to your shirt and holds the tension there. 



Shetland Knitting 

Other Names: Pit knitting, Scottish, Shetland, From the Hip, Old Way

What Is Shetland Knitting
If you're picturing a woman standing in the Scottish highlands with a knitting needle attached to a belt around her waist and knitting, you're probably not far off. The Shetland style of knitting goes by many names, but it's recognizable because of the way the working needle is held against the body. Because the dominant hand doesn't have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time, this style of knitting is much faster.

Shetland knitting is also one of the new forms of knitting that can easily be done standing up. It was designed as a way for knitters to quickly work up garments while also working on other chores.

This style is very similar to the style used by Hazel Tindall, who is often considered the world's fastest knitter. 







Knitting Methods: Eastern, Western, and Combination Knitting 

It should be noted that there's a difference between knitting styles and knitting methods. Knitting style is a synonym for a knitting hold -- the way you hold your needles and yarn. Knitting method, on the other hand, has to do with the way you form the stitches themselves.

There are only three possible knitting methods -- Eastern, Western, and combination. Most knitters knit in the Western method, although Eastern is also very common. Combination knitting utilizes the benefits of both styles in one piece of fabric to make complicated stitches much easier to knit. Combination knitting is popular because you can easily switch between knitting and purling without moving the yarn from one side of the needles to the other.

Here's a chart of the main differences between Eastern, Western, and combination knitting methods.




 
Western
Eastern
Combination


Knit Stitches
Leading leg in front
Leading leg in back
Leading leg in front


Purl Stitches
Leading leg in front
Leading leg in back
Leading leg in back


Yarn Wrap
Counter-clockwise(for right-handed)
Clockwise(for right-handed)
Counter-clockwise for knit (right-handed)Clockwise for purl (right-handed)


Stitches
Worked through front loop
Worked through back loop
Worked through back loop for knitsWorked through front loop for purls


Twisted Stitches
Worked through back loop
Worked through front loop
Worked through front loop for knitsWorked through back loop for purls



 


Check out this great article that goes deeper into the English vs Continental debate!
Note: This project is from I Like Knitting digital magazine. Non-members can access 3 free patterns every month. Subscribe to the I Like Knitting Gold Club for unlimited access to their entire pattern archive, featuring hundreds of exclusive patterns.








Which knitting style do you prefer?
Let us know in the comments! 



 
Read NextHow to Knit a Hat


Free projects, giveaways, exclusive partner offers, and more straight to your inbox!











Thank you for signing up!


We were unable to sign you up - please try again.





 

 








 
Tags / Related Topics



How To 





Your Recently Viewed Projects
 






The 5 Knitting Styles (And How to Knit Them)










Images from other crafters


Be the first to upload your own image for this pattern!






























 I have not made this yet so I cannot rate it.                    




Leave a comment...






 Include a Photo
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    


Click the button above or drag and drop images onto the button. You can upload two images.










We are adding your Comments. 
Thank you! Your comment has been added.
We are sorry. There was an error tyring to post your rating and review.
Your comment will appear after our editors have had a chance to review it.

Cancel Reply to Comment




Thanks for your comment. Don't forget to share!


























carolknight2 63297 88













Jun 05, 2019

English for over 60 years...... I think I will stick with what I know! The others look so complicated!


Reply




0



Report Abuse







streen 9692047













Mar 18, 2019

I never knew that there were so many knitting styles. I was taught the English style by my Canandian Grandmother. I had heard of the Continental Style but none of the others.


Reply




0



Report Abuse










Report Inappropriate Comment

Are you sure you would like to report this comment? It will be flagged for our moderators to take action.





Thank you for taking the time to improve the content on our site.


 
 
 



Project of the Day





 
 



Gymir Cowl

                    "This simply huge cowl has been named after the giant Gymir, who was in Norse mythology the giant whose daughter, Gerr, ultimately… 
                    

See more

Continue reading: "Gymir Cowl"



















What's Hot





 
 






How to Knit a Hat


How to Knit Intarsia


How Many Stitches to Cast On for a Hat


How Much Yarn Do I Need?


The 5 Knitting Styles (And How to Knit Them)


How Many Stitches to Cast On for a Blanket


Condo Knitting


How Many Stitches Should I Cast On for a Scarf?


6 Stretchy Cast On Methods


13 Circular Knitting Patterns for Practice





















 My Knitting Patterns (0) View »





Something worth saving?
Register now for FREE to:
SAVE all your favorite patternsADD personal notesQUICKLY reference your patterns

Log In


Join Us TodayForgot Password


 












Connect With Us






 








Our Newest Patterns & Articles





 
 





Mangrove Knit Stitch


Woven-look Throw Knitting Pattern


Loose Ends


Easy To Knit Slipper Pattern Knit Flat With Bulky Yarn On Straight Needles


Waffle Stitch Pattern


Stylish Cardigan With Colorful Stripes


Unisex Winter Hat


Spider Fingerless Gloves


Waffle Stitch Kitchen Towel 



See More
See More of Our Newest Patterns & Articles












Free eBooks



15 Free Cute Knitting Patterns for Every Season
24 Quick and Easy Knitting Patterns
9 Free Knitting Patterns Perfect for Spring
A Knitters Gift Guide: 8 Homemade Gift Ideas
A Yarn Hoarders Guide to Organization: Knitting Storage Solutions, Simple Knitting Patterns and More
Easy Lace Knitting Patterns
How to Knit for Beginners: 9 Free Tutorials
The Best Light & Lacy Knit Scarf Patterns: 7 Free Scarf Patterns for You



See More
See More Free eBooks



 







About Us
Advertise
Contact Us
FAQ
Keyword Index
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Privacy Policy
Share Your Project
Subscribe
Terms of Service
Unsubscribe







Prime Publishing Craft Group
© Copyright 2023 Prime Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.





---- 1 ----







Sign In to Your Account

Register Now!Forgot Password?



Sign In With One Of Your Social Accounts





OR


Sign in using email and password





Email:





Password:






Remember Me











[ Privacy Policy ]


[ Close Privacy Policy ]

[ Close Privacy Policy ]







Register Now!

Log InForgot Password?



Public/Display Name:


									Optional: This is the name that will appear alongside any reviews you create on the site. You can use letters, numbers and white space.
								


First Name:



Last Name:



Email:



Password:



Confirm Password:




Remember Me







 
						Join Through Facebook
				
[ Privacy Policy ]


[ Close Privacy Policy ]

[ Close Privacy Policy ]







Forgot Your Password?

Log InRegister Now!



Enter your email address and we will send your password.

							Email: 


















Images from other crafters



Share Your Images
Help others by adding images to this pattern. It's easy! Click here to start


Sign In or Join Us Today
Please sign into your account to add new images.



There are currently no images from other crafters.










close
Terms & Conditions

				You must enter into this Agreement if you want to submit digital images or other content to Prime Publishing through Sharing Customer Images (the "Service").  As used in this Agreement, "we" or "Prime Publishing" means Prime Publishing, LLC. and "you" means the individual or entity submitting materials to Prime Publishing.  Any individual or entity that wants to use the Service must accept the terms of this Agreement without change.  BY CLICKING THE ACCEPT TERMS AND CONDITIONS BUTTON, YOU AGREE TO BE BOUND BY ALL TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT AND ALL SPECIFICATIONS AND GUIDELINES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
				
				1) Eligibility.  You may only submit Materials to the Service for which you hold all intellectual property rights. In other words, if you submit a digital image to us, you must own all rights to such image or you must have the authorization of the person who does own those rights. The Service is limited to parties that lawfully can enter into and form contracts under applicable law.  Minors may not submit Materials to the Service. Further, you may not submit any personally identifiable information about any child under the age of 13.
				
				2) Definitions.  As used in this Agreement, (a) "Affiliates" means any entity controlled by, in control of, or under common control with Prime Publishing, (b) "Materials" means all content that you submit to Prime Publishing, including all photographs, illustrations, graphics and text, and (c) "Media" means any means of conveying information, whether now known or hereafter devised.
				
				3) License Grant for Materials.  You hereby grant to Prime Publishing and its Affiliates a worldwide, nonexclusive, royalty-free, perpetual right and license to (a) reproduce, distribute, transmit, publicly perform and publicly display the Materials, in whole or in part, in any manner and Media, (b) modify, adapt, translate and create derivative works from the Materials, in whole or in part, in any manner and Media, and (c) sublicense the foregoing rights, in whole or in part, to any third party, with or without a fee.
				
				4) Removal of Materials.  If you decide you would like to remove your Materials from the Service, you may provide written notice to Prime Publishing by either deleting the image through the Prime Publishing interface or by contacting Prime Publishing customer service, and Prime Publishing will remove such Materials from the Service within a reasonable period of time.
				
				5) License for Name, Trademarks and Likenesses.  You hereby grant to Prime Publishing, its Affiliates and sublicensees a nonexclusive, worldwide, royalty-free license to use all trademarks, trade names, and the names and likenesses of any individuals that appear in the Materials.  You grant Prime Publishing, its Affiliates and sublicensees the right to use the name that you submit in connection with the Materials.
				
				6) Specifications and Guidelines.  You agree to submit Materials to us in accordance with all guidelines for use of the Service posted on the Prime Publishing web site or of which you are otherwise notified ("Guidelines"), as these Guidelines may be changed in the future.
				
				7) Representations, Warranties and Indemnities.  You represent and warrant to Prime Publishing and its Affiliates that (a) you have the right, power, and authority necessary to enter into this Agreement, to fully perform your obligations hereunder, and to grant the licenses set forth in Paragraphs 3 and 5 above, (b) you will comply fully with all terms of this Agreement, (c) the Materials submitted to Prime Publishing by you, and Prime Publishing's and its Affiliates' exercise of their rights hereunder, do not and will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any intellectual property right, including but not limited to trademark rights, copyrights, moral rights and publicity rights of any third party, (d) you possess all rights necessary for the reproduction, distribution, transmission, public performance, public display, and other exploitation of the Materials by Prime Publishing and its Affiliates as permitted hereunder, (e) the Materials are not pornographic, obscene, libelous, defamatory, tortious, or otherwise unlawful, and (f) all factual statements submitted by you are accurate and not misleading.  You agree to indemnify, defend, and hold Prime Publishing and its Affiliates harmless from all claims, liabilities, damages, and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses) arising from your breach of any representation or warranty set forth in this paragraph.
				
				8) Restrictions.  You agree that you will not submit Materials that are unlawful, pornographic, libelous, defamatory, tortious, obscene, or racially, ethnically or otherwise objectionable, or that otherwise violate general Prime Publishing community standards.  We expressly reserve the right to remove or not make available any Materials that we deem to be in violation of this Agreement, applicable laws or our community standards in our sole discretion.  You agree that you will not upload, post, e-mail or otherwise transmit Materials to us or our Affiliates that contain software viruses or any other computer code, files, or programs designed to interrupt, destroy or limit the functionality of any computer software or hardware or telecommunications equipment.
				
				9) No Obligation.  Although we have the right to include your Materials in the Service or in any Media, we do not have the obligation to do so.  We may, in our sole discretion and for any reason, refuse the Materials or remove them from our Service at any time.
				
				10) Changes to Agreement.  We reserve the right to change any of the terms of this Agreement or any Specifications or Guidelines governing the Service at any time in our sole discretion.  All changes will be effective upon posting to the Service.  However, for all changes to this Agreement, excluding Specifications and Guidelines, we will post a notice of change for thirty (30) days.  You are responsible for reviewing the notice and any applicable changes.  YOUR CONTINUED USE OF THIS SERVICE FOLLOWING OUR POSTING OF ANY CHANGES WILL CONSTITUTE YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH CHANGES.
				
				11) Prime Publishing Intellectual Property.  Without our prior written consent, you may not use our intellectual property, including, without limitation, our trademarks, trade names, trade dress, or copyrighted material, in any manner.
				
				12) Communications.  Prime Publishing and its Affiliates may communicate with you in connection with the Service, electronically and in other Media, and you consent to such communications regardless of any "Customer Communication Preferences" (or similar preferences or requests) you may have indicated on the web sites of Prime Publishing or its Affiliates or by any other means.
				
				13) Waiver.  PRIME PUBLISHING AND ITS AFFILIATES WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO SUCH DAMAGES ARISING FROM BREACH OF CONTRACT OR WARRANTY OR FROM NEGLIGENCE OR STRICT LIABILITY) ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THIS AGREEMENT, EVEN IF WE HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF (OR KNEW OR SHOULD KNOWN OF) THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
				
				14) Disclaimer.  PRIME PUBLISHING PROVIDES THE SERVICE "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND.
				
				15) Miscellaneous.  This Agreement will be governed by the laws of the United States of America and the state of Washington, without reference to rules governing choice of laws.  Any action relating to this Agreement must be brought in the federal or state courts located in Seattle, Washington, and you irrevocably consent to the jurisdiction of such courts.  You may not assign this Agreement, by operation of law or otherwise, without our prior written consent.  Subject to that restriction, this Agreement will be binding on, inure to, and be enforceable against the parties and their respective successors and permitted assigns.  Our failure to enforce your strict performance of any provision of this Agreement will not constitute a waiver of our right to enforce such provision or any other provision of this Agreement subsequently.  The Specifications and Guidelines (including all future changes) are incorporated by reference into this Agreement.  This Agreement is in addition to, and does not supersede or modify, the terms and conditions of use of the web sites of Prime Publishing and its Affiliates.
				
close



close
Sharing Your Own Images

Who can share images?

					  You! Anyone who is a registered and logged in user.
					
What should I share?

					  Please share images that will help other visitors. For example:
					


					    Images that highlight a article's features ("Here are the controls on this music player", "See the clasp for this necklace", "Look at the box this came in")
					  

					    Images showing someone using a product ("Here I am wearing this scarf", "Install the ink cartridge here")
					  

					    Images related to a topic ("My dog Skipper", "A great outfit", "Our family at Yellowstone", "How to glue a chair using a cabinet clamp")
					

					    Images that show how a product performs ("I took this picture with this camera", "This shirt shrunk in the wash", "The saw blade after 100 cuts")
					  
					    Images that give a sense of the size of the product ("This refrigerator is actually 6' tall", "A cellphone the size of a credit card")
					  


					  Do include captions for your images. While not required, they provide context for your images.
					  Additionally, you can use the Image Notes feature to highlight one or more interesting areas in your image.  Everyone will see your notes when they roll over your image.
					

What shouldn't I share?

					  Behave as if you were a guest at a friend's dinner party: please treat the Prime Publishing community with respect. Do not share:
					


					    Profane, obscene, or spiteful images, or any images with nudity
					  
					    Images to which you do not own the intellectual property rights
					  
					    Images featuring phone numbers, mail addresses, or URLs. You can watermark an image with copyright information.
					  
					    Images featuring availability, price, or alternative ordering/shipping information
					  
					    Images featuring external Web sites, contests, or other solicitations
					  
					    Any personal information about children under 13
					  
					    Images with automobile license plates that are prominent and easily read (pictures with license plates that have been fuzzed out or that otherwise cannot be read are acceptable).
					  


					  The same guidelines apply to your captions and notes.
					

What image formats and sizes are supported?

					  We support JPEG, GIF and PNG images. Files must be no more than 1MB. Both the image height and the image width must be between 60 and 3500 pixels.
					

Instead of uploading an image, can I just enter a link to an image?

					  No, all images must be uploaded to Prime Publishing. This ensures your image is always available.
					

How long does it take to upload an image?
 
					  The time varies depending on the speed of your Internet connection and the size of the image file. For a 400KB image, for example, you should expect 2 to 4 minutes over a 56KB modem and under 1 minute for DSL or cable modem.
					

Where will my image appear?

					  Generally your image will appear where you uploaded it: in the article image gallery.
					

Who owns the images I upload?
 
					  The rights owner of the image continues to own the image; uploading your image to Prime Publishing does not transfer ownership.
					
close










 

































































































The 5 Knitting Styles ( And How to Knit Them ) | AllFreeKnitting . com close Advanced Pattern Search Search Term Enter a search term ( optional ) Categories Select One ( optional ) All Learn to Knit Accessories Baby Knits Bags Children ' s Knits Cowls Felted Knits Fingerless Gloves Knitting Patterns Free Afghan Knitting Patterns Gifts Hats Home Decor Knitting Charities Knitting Companies Knitting Designers Loom Patterns Men ' s Knits Miscellaneous Mittens Motifs Patterns for the Holidays Pet Knits Reviews Scarves Shawls Socks Sweaters Tops Toys Vests Printable ( optional ) Show only printer - friendly patterns Difficulty Level Select One ( optional ) All Beginner Intermediate Advanced Easy Kid Friendly Yarn Weight Select One ( optional ) All ( 6 ) Super Bulky / Super Chunky ( 4 - 11 stitches for 4 inches ) ( 5 ) Bulky / Chunky ( 12 - 15 stitches for 4 inches ) ( 4 ) Medium Weight / Worsted Weight and Aran ( 16 - 20 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 3 ) Light / DK ( 21 - 24 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 2 ) Fine ( 23 - 26 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 1 ) Super Fine ( 27 - 32 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 0 ) Lace ( 33 - 40 stitches to 4 inches ). Includes crochet thread . Other ( 7 ) Jumbo Knitting Needle Size Select as many as you like ( optional ) 1 or 2 . 25 mm 2 or 2 . 75 mm 3 or 3 . 25 mm 4 or 3 . 5 mm 5 or 3 . 75 mm 6 or 4 mm 7 or 4 . 5 mm 8 or 5 mm 9 or 5 . 5 mm 10 or 6 mm 10 . 5 or 6 . 5 mm 11 or 8 mm 13 or 9 mm 15 or 10 mm 17 or 12 . 75 mm 19 or 15 mm 35 or 19 mm 50 or 25 mm Circular Knitting Needles Double - Pointed Knitting Needles ( DPNs ) Advanced Pattern Search Register Now My Knitting Patterns Subscribe Sign In Menu SubscribeFree eBooksGiveawaysHow TosCollectionsSubmit Your ProjectProject of the DayWrite for Us Popular Free Knitting Patterns Knitting for BeginnersKnit Cowl PatternsEasy Knitting PatternsKnitting for Babies Categories Learn to Knit Tips and Tricks Video Tutorials Accessories Boot Cuffs Headbands Knit Belts Knit Jewelry Baby Knits Baby Blankets Baby Sets Baby Sweater Knitting Patterns Booties Free Baby Hat Knitting Patterns Bags Tote Children ' s Knits Children ' s Knit Gloves and Mittens Children ' s Knit Scarves Children ' s Knitted Sweater Patterns Knit Children ' s Hats Cowls Neck Warmers Felted Knits Felted Bags Fingerless Gloves Knitting Patterns Gloves Wrist Warmers Free Afghan Knitting Patterns Cable Afghans Knit Throws Gifts Hats Cable Hats Earflap Hats Knit Berets Ribbed Hats Home Decor Baskets Bath Knits Dishcloths and Washcloths Kitchen and Dining Pillows Potholders Rugs Knitting Charities Knitting Companies Knitting Designers Loom Patterns Loom Hats Loom Scarves Loom Socks Loom Wraps Men ' s Knits Gloves and Mittens Hats Scarves Sweaters and Vests Miscellaneous Collections Mittens Motifs Patterns for the Holidays 4th of July Knits Christmas Knits Easter Knits Halloween Knits St . Patrick ' s Day Knits Thanksgiving Knits Valentine ' s Day Knits Pet Knits Dog Sweaters Reviews Book Reviews Product Reviews Scarves Infinity Scarves Shawls Knit Ponchos Socks Cable Socks Knit Leg Warmers Slippers Sweaters Cardigans Shrugs and Boleros Tops Tanks Toys Amigurumi Vests Latest Comments Lisa " Actually it could easily be modified and done in one piece . To do so , follow the directions for the back , when it says to bind off the piece - don ' t , figure out how many stitches are needed to create the head opening , it ' s 7 " or 8 " depending on the size you make , cast those stitches off and work the second side separately with another ball of yarn . On the flip side work to the bound off stitches and cast on as many as you cast off continue working the pattern in reverse . When you get to the section to cast on for sleeves , is where you will bind off , since you already have the sleeves and carry on to finish sweater and bind off . Hope this helps , happy knitting ." see all comments reply Lisa " I found error ( s ) in the pattern and no way to contact the designer to ask for an errata ." see all comments reply Lisa " Looks like a nice project , however the patterns from this website that are featured are frequently missing so much essential information , that some of them are useless . The website for the yarn has to be translated and the translation to english is not great , so proves to be more than a little frustrating ." see all comments reply Lisa " There is no " book " you must click on the link to see the pattern on the page it links to . After you get to the page , you need to scroll down about 1 / 3 of the page to find the written pattern there . Hope this helps , happy knitting ." see all comments reply Lisa " Sorry , I don ' t know of a video for that stitch pattern . I did make this project about 10 or so years ago and I remember that it did not really look like the picture until it was completed , while it was on the needles it looked like it wasn ' t lining up . Is it possible that is what is happening with you ?" see all comments reply Home > Learn to Knit > The 5 Knitting Styles ( And How to Knit Them ) The 5 Knitting Styles ( And How to Knit Them ) Sometimes referred to as knitting holds , these five knitting styles are distinct from knitting methods . Some of them might even help you knit faster ! By : Toby Kuhnke , Editor , AllFreeKnitting . com Updated December 28 , 2022 You must be logged in to add a private note . Login | Register My Notes My Notes ONLY YOU see your private notes . Save Remove More Share This Link We are adding the pattern to your Knitting Patterns . This pattern has been saved to My Knitting Patterns . Click here to view your Knitting Patterns . You must be logged in to save a pattern . Login | Register Everyone ' s knitting style is a little different . Whether it ' s tension , your personal knitting gauge , or the way you wrap your yarn around your fingers . But when it comes to which hand you hold your yarn in , the knitting world is pretty divided . There are five basic knitting styles based on the way the yarn is held and wrapped around the working needle . The names of these styles often are associated with nationalities , like English knitting or Irish Cottage style , but the style you prefer has very little to do with where you grew up , or even where you learned to knit . There are people in England and the United States who do not knit English ( also called American ) style , and there are plenty of people in continental Europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non - dominant hand , as is done in continental knitting . Likewise , Portuguese knitting is done all over the world , but the name " Portuguese " is just the name that stuck . Because of this , you will see that almost every single one of these knitting styles has two or more alternate names . English Knitting ( Throwing ) Other Names : American , French ( in Japan ) What Is English Knitting ? English knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand , alongside the working needle . While it is common in the British Isles and North America , English knitting is practiced by knitters all over the world and is probably the most common . In a survey of just under 300 AllFreeKnitting readers , more than 60 % said they knit English style . Continental Knitting ( Picking ) Other Names : German , European What Is Continental Knitting ? Continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non - dominant hand . Many knitters find this method a lot quicker , and crocheters who are learning how to knit often find continental feels more natural in their hands . Roughly 30 % of the knitters from the survey mentioned above knit continental . Because this style holds the yarn in the non - dominant hand , there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling . Instead , the yarn is either placed above or below the needle in the non - dominant hand . Variations on Continental Style Norwegian Knitting The Norwegian style of knitting is distinct because of the way purl stitches are worked . The Norwegian purl is worked with the yarn in back ; patterns that switch back and forth between knitting and purling , like rib stitches , are great for practicing the Norwegian purl . This particular hold puts the working yarn in the non - dominant hand , which makes it a variant of continental ; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style . This video for how to knit the Norwegian purl is a great way to learn this fun and useful technique . Russian Knitting Russian knitting is very similar to regular continental , and the knit and purl stitches themselves are worked in the same way . The only distinction with Russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non - dominant hand , very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg . This makes Russian style a very tight hold that allows you to flick the yarn over the tip of the needle instead of picking it with the needle itself . This style is similar to lever knitting ( see below ) with the yarn in the non - dominant hand . Lever Knitting ( Flicking ) Other Names : Peruvian , Catholic , Australian , Irish Cottage What Is Lever Knitting ? Lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely , creating a sort of back - and - forth levering motion . Many knitters who use this style hold their working needle like a pencil , which frees up their pointer finger to hold the tension of their yarn and " flick " it around the end of the needle . Stephanie Pearl - McPhee , also known as the Yarn Harlot , famously uses this technique to knitting at lightning fast speeds . Portuguese Knitting Other Names : Despite the fact that Portuguese knitting is done around the world and is less tied to a specific location than any other style of knitting , Portuguese knitting does not have any other common names . What Is Portuguese Knitting ? Portuguese knitting is an especially unique knitting hold because the tension of the yarn is not held in the hands at all . Instead , Portuguese knitters wrap the yarn around the back of their necks . The reason so many knitters like this style is that it frees up the fingers for speed . In every other knitting style , the tension is held in the hands ; this gives your hands two jobs to do at the same time -- holding the yarn and working the stitches with the needles . When the tension is held around the neck , there ' s one less thing you have to worry about when making your stitches . This technique is also great for helping with knitting pain because so much of the stress in the hands comes from holding the yarn . If knitting with the yarn around your neck is a little too out of the box for you , you can also get a Portuguese knitting pin that attaches to your shirt and holds the tension there . Shetland Knitting Other Names : Pit knitting , Scottish , Shetland , From the Hip , Old Way What Is Shetland Knitting If you ' re picturing a woman standing in the Scottish highlands with a knitting needle attached to a belt around her waist and knitting , you ' re probably not far off . The Shetland style of knitting goes by many names , but it ' s recognizable because of the way the working needle is held against the body . Because the dominant hand doesn ' t have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time , this style of knitting is much faster . Shetland knitting is also one of the new forms of knitting that can easily be done standing up . It was designed as a way for knitters to quickly work up garments while also working on other chores . This style is very similar to the style used by Hazel Tindall , who is often considered the world ' s fastest knitter . Knitting Methods : Eastern , Western , and Combination Knitting It should be noted that there ' s a difference between knitting styles and knitting methods . Knitting style is a synonym for a knitting hold -- the way you hold your needles and yarn . Knitting method , on the other hand , has to do with the way you form the stitches themselves . There are only three possible knitting methods -- Eastern , Western , and combination . Most knitters knit in the Western method , although Eastern is also very common . Combination knitting utilizes the benefits of both styles in one piece of fabric to make complicated stitches much easier to knit . Combination knitting is popular because you can easily switch between knitting and purling without moving the yarn from one side of the needles to the other . Here ' s a chart of the main differences between Eastern , Western , and combination knitting methods . Western Eastern Combination Knit Stitches Leading leg in front Leading leg in back Leading leg in front Purl Stitches Leading leg in front Leading leg in back Leading leg in back Yarn Wrap Counter - clockwise ( for right - handed ) Clockwise ( for right - handed ) Counter - clockwise for knit ( right - handed ) Clockwise for purl ( right - handed ) Stitches Worked through front loop Worked through back loop Worked through back loop for knitsWorked through front loop for purls Twisted Stitches Worked through back loop Worked through front loop Worked through front loop for knitsWorked through back loop for purls Check out this great article that goes deeper into the English vs Continental debate ! Note : This project is from I Like Knitting digital magazine . Non - members can access 3 free patterns every month . Subscribe to the I Like Knitting Gold Club for unlimited access to their entire pattern archive , featuring hundreds of exclusive patterns . Which knitting style do you prefer ? Let us know in the comments ! Read NextHow to Knit a Hat Free projects , giveaways , exclusive partner offers , and more straight to your inbox ! Thank you for signing up ! We were unable to sign you up - please try again . Tags / Related Topics How To Your Recently Viewed Projects The 5 Knitting Styles ( And How to Knit Them ) Images from other crafters Be the first to upload your own image for this pattern ! I have not made this yet so I cannot rate it . Leave a comment ... Include a Photo Click the button above or drag and drop images onto the button . You can upload two images . We are adding your Comments . Thank you ! Your comment has been added . We are sorry . There was an error tyring to post your rating and review . Your comment will appear after our editors have had a chance to review it . Cancel Reply to Comment Thanks for your comment . Don ' t forget to share ! carolknight2 63297 88 Jun 05 , 2019 English for over 60 years ...... I think I will stick with what I know ! The others look so complicated ! Reply 0 Report Abuse streen 9692047 Mar 18 , 2019 I never knew that there were so many knitting styles . I was taught the English style by my Canandian Grandmother . I had heard of the Continental Style but none of the others . Reply 0 Report Abuse Report Inappropriate Comment Are you sure you would like to report this comment ? It will be flagged for our moderators to take action . Thank you for taking the time to improve the content on our site . Project of the Day Gymir Cowl " This simply huge cowl has been named after the giant Gymir , who was in Norse mythology the giant whose daughter , Gerr , ultimately … See more Continue reading : " Gymir Cowl " What ' s Hot How to Knit a Hat How to Knit Intarsia How Many Stitches to Cast On for a Hat How Much Yarn Do I Need ? The 5 Knitting Styles ( And How to Knit Them ) How Many Stitches to Cast On for a Blanket Condo Knitting How Many Stitches Should I Cast On for a Scarf ? 6 Stretchy Cast On Methods 13 Circular Knitting Patterns for Practice My Knitting Patterns ( 0 ) View » Something worth saving ? Register now for FREE to : SAVE all your favorite patternsADD personal notesQUICKLY reference your patterns Log In Join Us TodayForgot Password Connect With Us Our Newest Patterns & Articles Mangrove Knit Stitch Woven - look Throw Knitting Pattern Loose Ends Easy To Knit Slipper Pattern Knit Flat With Bulky Yarn On Straight Needles Waffle Stitch Pattern Stylish Cardigan With Colorful Stripes Unisex Winter Hat Spider Fingerless Gloves Waffle Stitch Kitchen Towel See More See More of Our Newest Patterns & Articles Free eBooks 15 Free Cute Knitting Patterns for Every Season 24 Quick and Easy Knitting Patterns 9 Free Knitting Patterns Perfect for Spring A Knitters Gift Guide : 8 Homemade Gift Ideas A Yarn Hoarders Guide to Organization : Knitting Storage Solutions , Simple Knitting Patterns and More Easy Lace Knitting Patterns How to Knit for Beginners : 9 Free Tutorials The Best Light & Lacy Knit Scarf Patterns : 7 Free Scarf Patterns for You See More See More Free eBooks About Us Advertise Contact Us FAQ Keyword Index Do Not Sell My Personal Information Privacy Policy Share Your Project Subscribe Terms of Service Unsubscribe Prime Publishing Craft Group © Copyright 2023 Prime Publishing , LLC . All rights reserved . ---- 1 ---- Sign In to Your Account Register Now ! Forgot Password ? Sign In With One Of Your Social Accounts OR Sign in using email and password Email : Password : Remember Me [ Privacy Policy ] [ Close Privacy Policy ] [ Close Privacy Policy ] Register Now ! Log InForgot Password ? Public / Display Name : Optional : This is the name that will appear alongside any reviews you create on the site . You can use letters , numbers and white space . First Name : Last Name : Email : Password : Confirm Password : Remember Me Join Through Facebook [ Privacy Policy ] [ Close Privacy Policy ] [ Close Privacy Policy ] Forgot Your Password ? Log InRegister Now ! Enter your email address and we will send your password . Email : Images from other crafters Share Your Images Help others by adding images to this pattern . It ' s easy ! Click here to start Sign In or Join Us Today Please sign into your account to add new images . There are currently no images from other crafters . close Terms & Conditions You must enter into this Agreement if you want to submit digital images or other content to Prime Publishing through Sharing Customer Images ( the " Service "). As used in this Agreement , " we " or " Prime Publishing " means Prime Publishing , LLC . and " you " means the individual or entity submitting materials to Prime Publishing . Any individual or entity that wants to use the Service must accept the terms of this Agreement without change . BY CLICKING THE ACCEPT TERMS AND CONDITIONS BUTTON , YOU AGREE TO BE BOUND BY ALL TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT AND ALL SPECIFICATIONS AND GUIDELINES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE . 1 ) Eligibility . You may only submit Materials to the Service for which you hold all intellectual property rights . In other words , if you submit a digital image to us , you must own all rights to such image or you must have the authorization of the person who does own those rights . The Service is limited to parties that lawfully can enter into and form contracts under applicable law . Minors may not submit Materials to the Service . Further , you may not submit any personally identifiable information about any child under the age of 13 . 2 ) Definitions . As used in this Agreement , ( a ) " Affiliates " means any entity controlled by , in control of , or under common control with Prime Publishing , ( b ) " Materials " means all content that you submit to Prime Publishing , including all photographs , illustrations , graphics and text , and ( c ) " Media " means any means of conveying information , whether now known or hereafter devised . 3 ) License Grant for Materials . You hereby grant to Prime Publishing and its Affiliates a worldwide , nonexclusive , royalty - free , perpetual right and license to ( a ) reproduce , distribute , transmit , publicly perform and publicly display the Materials , in whole or in part , in any manner and Media , ( b ) modify , adapt , translate and create derivative works from the Materials , in whole or in part , in any manner and Media , and ( c ) sublicense the foregoing rights , in whole or in part , to any third party , with or without a fee . 4 ) Removal of Materials . If you decide you would like to remove your Materials from the Service , you may provide written notice to Prime Publishing by either deleting the image through the Prime Publishing interface or by contacting Prime Publishing customer service , and Prime Publishing will remove such Materials from the Service within a reasonable period of time . 5 ) License for Name , Trademarks and Likenesses . You hereby grant to Prime Publishing , its Affiliates and sublicensees a nonexclusive , worldwide , royalty - free license to use all trademarks , trade names , and the names and likenesses of any individuals that appear in the Materials . You grant Prime Publishing , its Affiliates and sublicensees the right to use the name that you submit in connection with the Materials . 6 ) Specifications and Guidelines . You agree to submit Materials to us in accordance with all guidelines for use of the Service posted on the Prime Publishing web site or of which you are otherwise notified (" Guidelines "), as these Guidelines may be changed in the future . 7 ) Representations , Warranties and Indemnities . You represent and warrant to Prime Publishing and its Affiliates that ( a ) you have the right , power , and authority necessary to enter into this Agreement , to fully perform your obligations hereunder , and to grant the licenses set forth in Paragraphs 3 and 5 above , ( b ) you will comply fully with all terms of this Agreement , ( c ) the Materials submitted to Prime Publishing by you , and Prime Publishing ' s and its Affiliates ' exercise of their rights hereunder , do not and will not violate , misappropriate or infringe any intellectual property right , including but not limited to trademark rights , copyrights , moral rights and publicity rights of any third party , ( d ) you possess all rights necessary for the reproduction , distribution , transmission , public performance , public display , and other exploitation of the Materials by Prime Publishing and its Affiliates as permitted hereunder , ( e ) the Materials are not pornographic , obscene , libelous , defamatory , tortious , or otherwise unlawful , and ( f ) all factual statements submitted by you are accurate and not misleading . You agree to indemnify , defend , and hold Prime Publishing and its Affiliates harmless from all claims , liabilities , damages , and expenses ( including , without limitation , reasonable attorneys ' fees and expenses ) arising from your breach of any representation or warranty set forth in this paragraph . 8 ) Restrictions . You agree that you will not submit Materials that are unlawful , pornographic , libelous , defamatory , tortious , obscene , or racially , ethnically or otherwise objectionable , or that otherwise violate general Prime Publishing community standards . We expressly reserve the right to remove or not make available any Materials that we deem to be in violation of this Agreement , applicable laws or our community standards in our sole discretion . You agree that you will not upload , post , e - mail or otherwise transmit Materials to us or our Affiliates that contain software viruses or any other computer code , files , or programs designed to interrupt , destroy or limit the functionality of any computer software or hardware or telecommunications equipment . 9 ) No Obligation . Although we have the right to include your Materials in the Service or in any Media , we do not have the obligation to do so . We may , in our sole discretion and for any reason , refuse the Materials or remove them from our Service at any time . 10 ) Changes to Agreement . We reserve the right to change any of the terms of this Agreement or any Specifications or Guidelines governing the Service at any time in our sole discretion . All changes will be effective upon posting to the Service . However , for all changes to this Agreement , excluding Specifications and Guidelines , we will post a notice of change for thirty ( 30 ) days . You are responsible for reviewing the notice and any applicable changes . YOUR CONTINUED USE OF THIS SERVICE FOLLOWING OUR POSTING OF ANY CHANGES WILL CONSTITUTE YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH CHANGES . 11 ) Prime Publishing Intellectual Property . Without our prior written consent , you may not use our intellectual property , including , without limitation , our trademarks , trade names , trade dress , or copyrighted material , in any manner . 12 ) Communications . Prime Publishing and its Affiliates may communicate with you in connection with the Service , electronically and in other Media , and you consent to such communications regardless of any " Customer Communication Preferences " ( or similar preferences or requests ) you may have indicated on the web sites of Prime Publishing or its Affiliates or by any other means . 13 ) Waiver . PRIME PUBLISHING AND ITS AFFILIATES WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT , INCIDENTAL , OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ( INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO SUCH DAMAGES ARISING FROM BREACH OF CONTRACT OR WARRANTY OR FROM NEGLIGENCE OR STRICT LIABILITY ) ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THIS AGREEMENT , EVEN IF WE HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF ( OR KNEW OR SHOULD KNOWN OF ) THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES . 14 ) Disclaimer . PRIME PUBLISHING PROVIDES THE SERVICE " AS IS " WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND . 15 ) Miscellaneous . This Agreement will be governed by the laws of the United States of America and the state of Washington , without reference to rules governing choice of laws . Any action relating to this Agreement must be brought in the federal or state courts located in Seattle , Washington , and you irrevocably consent to the jurisdiction of such courts . You may not assign this Agreement , by operation of law or otherwise , without our prior written consent . Subject to that restriction , this Agreement will be binding on , inure to , and be enforceable against the parties and their respective successors and permitted assigns . Our failure to enforce your strict performance of any provision of this Agreement will not constitute a waiver of our right to enforce such provision or any other provision of this Agreement subsequently . The Specifications and Guidelines ( including all future changes ) are incorporated by reference into this Agreement . This Agreement is in addition to , and does not supersede or modify , the terms and conditions of use of the web sites of Prime Publishing and its Affiliates . close close Sharing Your Own Images Who can share images ? You ! Anyone who is a registered and logged in user . What should I share ? Please share images that will help other visitors . For example : Images that highlight a article ' s features (" Here are the controls on this music player ", " See the clasp for this necklace ", " Look at the box this came in ") Images showing someone using a product (" Here I am wearing this scarf ", " Install the ink cartridge here ") Images related to a topic (" My dog Skipper ", " A great outfit ", " Our family at Yellowstone ", " How to glue a chair using a cabinet clamp ") Images that show how a product performs (" I took this picture with this camera ", " This shirt shrunk in the wash ", " The saw blade after 100 cuts ") Images that give a sense of the size of the product (" This refrigerator is actually 6 ' tall ", " A cellphone the size of a credit card ") Do include captions for your images . While not required , they provide context for your images . Additionally , you can use the Image Notes feature to highlight one or more interesting areas in your image . Everyone will see your notes when they roll over your image . What shouldn ' t I share ? Behave as if you were a guest at a friend ' s dinner party : please treat the Prime Publishing community with respect . Do not share : Profane , obscene , or spiteful images , or any images with nudity Images to which you do not own the intellectual property rights Images featuring phone numbers , mail addresses , or URLs . You can watermark an image with copyright information . Images featuring availability , price , or alternative ordering / shipping information Images featuring external Web sites , contests , or other solicitations Any personal information about children under 13 Images with automobile license plates that are prominent and easily read ( pictures with license plates that have been fuzzed out or that otherwise cannot be read are acceptable ). The same guidelines apply to your captions and notes . What image formats and sizes are supported ? We support JPEG , GIF and PNG images . Files must be no more than 1MB . Both the image height and the image width must be between 60 and 3500 pixels . Instead of uploading an image , can I just enter a link to an image ? No , all images must be uploaded to Prime Publishing . This ensures your image is always available . How long does it take to upload an image ? The time varies depending on the speed of your Internet connection and the size of the image file . For a 400KB image , for example , you should expect 2 to 4 minutes over a 56KB modem and under 1 minute for DSL or cable modem . Where will my image appear ? Generally your image will appear where you uploaded it : in the article image gallery . Who owns the images I upload ? The rights owner of the image continues to own the image ; uploading your image to Prime Publishing does not transfer ownership . close