



The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic, plain, and fancy needlework. Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed, the method of working, the materials used, the meaning of technical terms, and, where necessary, tracing the origin and history of the various works described. Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings, and coloured plates. Plain sewing, textiles, dressmaking, appliances, and terms : Caulfeild, Sophia Frances Ann, 1824-1911 : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive












 






















Skip to main content




We will keep fighting for all libraries - stand with us!

















Internet Archive logo
A line drawing of the Internet Archive headquarters building façade.


























Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying glass.











Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying glass.









Upload icon
An illustration of a horizontal line over an up pointing arrow.


Upload








User icon
An illustration of a person's head and chest.




Sign up
        |
        Log in
















Web icon
An illustration of a computer application window



Wayback Machine









Texts icon
An illustration of an open book.



Books









Video icon
An illustration of two cells of a film strip.



Video









Audio icon
An illustration of an audio speaker.








Audio









Software icon
An illustration of a 3.5" floppy disk.



Software









Images icon
An illustration of two photographs.



Images









Donate icon
An illustration of a heart shape



Donate









Ellipses icon
An illustration of text ellipses.



More











Hamburger icon
An icon used to represent a menu that can be toggled by interacting with this icon.












Internet Archive Audio


Live Music Archive

Librivox Free Audio



Featured


All Audio

This Just In

Grateful Dead

Netlabels

Old Time Radio

78 RPMs and Cylinder Recordings




Top


Audio Books & Poetry

Computers, Technology and Science

Music, Arts & Culture

News & Public Affairs

Spirituality & Religion

Podcasts

Radio News Archive





Images


Metropolitan Museum

Cleveland Museum of Art



Featured


All Images

This Just In

Flickr Commons

Occupy Wall Street Flickr

Cover Art

USGS Maps




Top


NASA Images

Solar System Collection

Ames Research Center





Software


Internet Arcade

Console Living Room



Featured


All Software

This Just In

Old School Emulation

MS-DOS Games

Historical Software

Classic PC Games

Software Library




Top


Kodi Archive and Support File

Vintage Software

APK

MS-DOS

CD-ROM Software

CD-ROM Software Library

Software Sites

Tucows Software Library

Shareware CD-ROMs

Software Capsules Compilation

CD-ROM Images

ZX Spectrum

DOOM Level CD





Books


Books to Borrow

Open Library



Featured


All Books

All Texts

This Just In

Smithsonian Libraries

FEDLINK (US)

Genealogy

Lincoln Collection




Top


American Libraries

Canadian Libraries

Universal Library

Project Gutenberg

Children's Library

Biodiversity Heritage Library

Books by Language

Additional Collections





Video


TV News

Understanding 9/11



Featured


All Video

This Just In

Prelinger Archives

Democracy Now!

Occupy Wall Street

TV NSA Clip Library




Top


Animation & Cartoons

Arts & Music

Computers & Technology

Cultural & Academic Films

Ephemeral Films

Movies

News & Public Affairs

Spirituality & Religion

Sports Videos

Television

Videogame Videos

Vlogs

Youth Media










          Search the history of over 804 billion
          web pages
          on the Internet.
        




Search the Wayback Machine




Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying glass.








Mobile Apps


Wayback Machine (iOS)

Wayback Machine (Android)


Browser Extensions


Chrome

Firefox

Safari

Edge




Archive-It Subscription


Explore the Collections

Learn More

Build Collections






Save Page Now
Capture a web page as it appears now for use as a trusted citation in the future.




Please enter a valid web address







AboutBlogProjectsHelpDonateContactJobsVolunteerPeople














Sign up for free

Log in











          Search metadata
        



          Search text contents
        



          Search TV news captions
        



          Search radio transcripts
        



          Search archived web sites
        

Advanced Search







About



Blog



Projects



Help



Donate

Donate icon
An illustration of a heart shape






Contact



Jobs



Volunteer



People


















    The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic, plain, and fancy needlework. Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed, the method of working, the materials used, the meaning of technical terms, and, where necessary, tracing the origin and history of the various works described. Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings, and coloured plates. Plain sewing, textiles, dressmaking, appliances, and terms  

    Bookreader Item Preview
  









remove-circle
                    Internet Archive's in-browser bookreader                    "theater" requires JavaScript to be enabled.
                    It appears your browser does not have it turned on.
                    Please see your browser settings for this feature.
                  

















remove-circle 
Share or Embed This Item







Share to Twitter



Share to Facebook



Share to Reddit



Share to Tumblr



Share to Pinterest



Share via email








EMBED







EMBED (for wordpress.com hosted blogs and archive.org item <description> tags)
[archiveorg dictionaryofneed06caul width=560 height=384 frameborder=0 webkitallowfullscreen=true mozallowfullscreen=true]




                Want more?
                Advanced embedding details, examples, and help!
              


















Favorite 




Share 



Flag

Flag this item for



                  Graphic Violence                



                  Explicit Sexual Content                



                  Hate Speech                



                  Misinformation/Disinformation                



                  Marketing/Phishing/Advertising                



                  Misleading/Inaccurate/Missing Metadata                


 
 
 


texts

The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic, plain, and fancy needlework. Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed, the method of working, the materials used, the meaning of technical terms, and, where necessary, tracing the origin and history of the various works described. Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings, and coloured plates. Plain sewing, textiles, dressmaking, appliances, and terms

 by
Caulfeild, Sophia Frances Ann, 1824-1911
 












Publication date


1885




Topics
Needlework

 Publisher
London : L. Upcott Gill
 Collection
umassdartmouthclairetcarney; blc; americana


 Digitizing sponsor
Boston Library Consortium Member Libraries


 Contributor
Claire T. Carney Library, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth

 Language
English

 Volume
Vol. 6
  

At head of t.-p.: Dedicated to H. R. H. Princess Louise, marchioness of Lorne



Addeddate
2010-10-06 15:39:17


Bookplateleaf
0004


Call number
153152


Camera
Canon 5D


External-identifier

              urn:oclc:record:1043009844 


Foldoutcount
0


Identifier
dictionaryofneed06caul


Identifier-ark
ark:/13960/t54f2k231


Ocr
ABBYY FineReader 8.0


Page-progression
lr


Pages
168


Ppi
400


Scandate
20101012014145


Scanner
scribe3.boston.archive.org


Scanningcenter
boston


Worldcat (source edition)

              6173864                


Show More
Show Less




 Full catalog record
MARCXML
 



plus-circle            Add Review

comment
        Reviews
      

          There are no reviews yet. Be the first one to
          write a review.
        






2,275

        Views      

37
Favorites




        DOWNLOAD OPTIONS
      




download                1 file              



              ABBYY GZ              download 





download                1 file              



              B/W PDF              download 





download                1 file              



              DAISY              download 
For print-disabled users





download                1 file              



              EPUB              download 





download                1 file              



              FULL TEXT              download 





download                1 file              



              ITEM TILE              download 





download                1 file              



              KINDLE              download 





download                1 file              



              PDF              download 





download                1 file              



              SINGLE PAGE ORIGINAL JP2 TAR              download 





download                1 file              



              SINGLE PAGE PROCESSED JP2 ZIP              download 





download                1 file              



              TORRENT              download 




download 18 Files
            
download                10 Original

SHOW ALL





IN COLLECTIONS

          Claire T. Carney Library, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth Collection                  

          The Boston Library Consortium                      





        Uploaded by
                  
            LisaEgge          
        
                  on October 6, 2010









SIMILAR ITEMS (based on metadata)







Terms of Service (last updated 12/31/2014)













The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic , plain , and fancy needlework . Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed , the method of working , the materials used , the meaning of technical terms , and , where necessary , tracing the origin and history of the various works described . Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings , and coloured plates . Plain sewing , textiles , dressmaking , appliances , and terms : Caulfeild , Sophia Frances Ann , 1824 - 1911 : Free Download , Borrow , and Streaming : Internet Archive Skip to main content We will keep fighting for all libraries - stand with us ! Internet Archive logo A line drawing of the Internet Archive headquarters building façade . Search icon An illustration of a magnifying glass . Search icon An illustration of a magnifying glass . Upload icon An illustration of a horizontal line over an up pointing arrow . Upload User icon An illustration of a person ' s head and chest . Sign up | Log in Web icon An illustration of a computer application window Wayback Machine Texts icon An illustration of an open book . Books Video icon An illustration of two cells of a film strip . Video Audio icon An illustration of an audio speaker . Audio Software icon An illustration of a 3 . 5 " floppy disk . Software Images icon An illustration of two photographs . Images Donate icon An illustration of a heart shape Donate Ellipses icon An illustration of text ellipses . More Hamburger icon An icon used to represent a menu that can be toggled by interacting with this icon . Internet Archive Audio Live Music Archive Librivox Free Audio Featured All Audio This Just In Grateful Dead Netlabels Old Time Radio 78 RPMs and Cylinder Recordings Top Audio Books & Poetry Computers , Technology and Science Music , Arts & Culture News & Public Affairs Spirituality & Religion Podcasts Radio News Archive Images Metropolitan Museum Cleveland Museum of Art Featured All Images This Just In Flickr Commons Occupy Wall Street Flickr Cover Art USGS Maps Top NASA Images Solar System Collection Ames Research Center Software Internet Arcade Console Living Room Featured All Software This Just In Old School Emulation MS - DOS Games Historical Software Classic PC Games Software Library Top Kodi Archive and Support File Vintage Software APK MS - DOS CD - ROM Software CD - ROM Software Library Software Sites Tucows Software Library Shareware CD - ROMs Software Capsules Compilation CD - ROM Images ZX Spectrum DOOM Level CD Books Books to Borrow Open Library Featured All Books All Texts This Just In Smithsonian Libraries FEDLINK ( US ) Genealogy Lincoln Collection Top American Libraries Canadian Libraries Universal Library Project Gutenberg Children ' s Library Biodiversity Heritage Library Books by Language Additional Collections Video TV News Understanding 9 / 11 Featured All Video This Just In Prelinger Archives Democracy Now ! Occupy Wall Street TV NSA Clip Library Top Animation & Cartoons Arts & Music Computers & Technology Cultural & Academic Films Ephemeral Films Movies News & Public Affairs Spirituality & Religion Sports Videos Television Videogame Videos Vlogs Youth Media Search the history of over 804 billion web pages on the Internet . Search the Wayback Machine Search icon An illustration of a magnifying glass . Mobile Apps Wayback Machine ( iOS ) Wayback Machine ( Android ) Browser Extensions Chrome Firefox Safari Edge Archive - It Subscription Explore the Collections Learn More Build Collections Save Page Now Capture a web page as it appears now for use as a trusted citation in the future . Please enter a valid web address AboutBlogProjectsHelpDonateContactJobsVolunteerPeople Sign up for free Log in Search metadata Search text contents Search TV news captions Search radio transcripts Search archived web sites Advanced Search About Blog Projects Help Donate Donate icon An illustration of a heart shape Contact Jobs Volunteer People The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic , plain , and fancy needlework . Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed , the method of working , the materials used , the meaning of technical terms , and , where necessary , tracing the origin and history of the various works described . Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings , and coloured plates . Plain sewing , textiles , dressmaking , appliances , and terms Bookreader Item Preview remove - circle Internet Archive ' s in - browser bookreader " theater " requires JavaScript to be enabled . It appears your browser does not have it turned on . Please see your browser settings for this feature . remove - circle Share or Embed This Item Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share to Reddit Share to Tumblr Share to Pinterest Share via email EMBED EMBED ( for wordpress . com hosted blogs and archive . org item < description > tags ) [ archiveorg dictionaryofneed06caul width = 560 height = 384 frameborder = 0 webkitallowfullscreen = true mozallowfullscreen = true ] Want more ? Advanced embedding details , examples , and help ! Favorite Share Flag Flag this item for Graphic Violence Explicit Sexual Content Hate Speech Misinformation / Disinformation Marketing / Phishing / Advertising Misleading / Inaccurate / Missing Metadata texts The dictionary of needlework : an encyclopaedia of artistic , plain , and fancy needlework . Dealing fully with the details of all the stitches employed , the method of working , the materials used , the meaning of technical terms , and , where necessary , tracing the origin and history of the various works described . Illustrated with upwards of 800 wood engravings , and coloured plates . Plain sewing , textiles , dressmaking , appliances , and terms by Caulfeild , Sophia Frances Ann , 1824 - 1911 Publication date 1885 Topics Needlework Publisher London : L . Upcott Gill Collection umassdartmouthclairetcarney ; blc ; americana Digitizing sponsor Boston Library Consortium Member Libraries Contributor Claire T . Carney Library , University of Massachusetts Dartmouth Language English Volume Vol . 6 At head of t .- p .: Dedicated to H . R . H . Princess Louise , marchioness of Lorne Addeddate 2010 - 10 - 06 15 : 39 : 17 Bookplateleaf 0004 Call number 153152 Camera Canon 5D External - identifier urn : oclc : record : 1043009844 Foldoutcount 0 Identifier dictionaryofneed06caul Identifier - ark ark :/ 13960 / t54f2k231 Ocr ABBYY FineReader 8 . 0 Page - progression lr Pages 168 Ppi 400 Scandate 20101012014145 Scanner scribe3 . boston . archive . org Scanningcenter boston Worldcat ( source edition ) 6173864 Show More Show Less Full catalog record MARCXML plus - circle Add Review comment Reviews There are no reviews yet . Be the first one to write a review . 2 , 275 Views 37 Favorites DOWNLOAD OPTIONS download 1 file ABBYY GZ download download 1 file B / W PDF download download 1 file DAISY download For print - disabled users download 1 file EPUB download download 1 file FULL TEXT download download 1 file ITEM TILE download download 1 file KINDLE download download 1 file PDF download download 1 file SINGLE PAGE ORIGINAL JP2 TAR download download 1 file SINGLE PAGE PROCESSED JP2 ZIP download download 1 file TORRENT download download 18 Files download 10 Original SHOW ALL IN COLLECTIONS Claire T . Carney Library , University of Massachusetts Dartmouth Collection The Boston Library Consortium Uploaded by LisaEgge on October 6 , 2010 SIMILAR ITEMS ( based on metadata ) Terms of Service ( last updated 12 / 31 / 2014 )