



Embroidery - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History


				Toggle History subsection
			




1.1Origins







1.2Historical applications and techniques





1.2.1Embroidered books







1.2.2The Islamic world











2Classification







3Traditional hand embroidery around the world







4Materials







5Machine embroidery







6Resurgence of hand embroidery







7In literature







8Qualifications







9Gallery







10See also







11Notes


				Toggle Notes subsection
			




11.1Citations







11.2Bibliography









12Further reading







13External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Embroidery




63 languages



AfrikaansÆngliscالعربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilge한국어ՀայերենBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаKurdîКыргызчаLatinaMagyarമലയാളംमराठीBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSicilianuSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்తెలుగుТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Art or handicraft of decorating fabric or other materials with needle and thread or yarn
This article is about handcraft. For Bradbury's short story, see Embroidery (short story).
 Laid threads, a surface technique in wool on linen. The Bayeux Tapestry, 11th century.
Embroidery is the craft of decorating fabric or other materials using a needle to apply thread or yarn. Embroidery may also incorporate other materials such as pearls, beads, quills, and sequins. In modern days, embroidery is usually seen on caps, hats, coats, overlays, blankets, dress shirts, denim, dresses, stockings, scarfs, and golf shirts. Embroidery is available in a wide variety of thread or yarn colour. It is often used to personalize gifts or clothing items.
Some of the basic techniques or stitches of the earliest embroidery are chain stitch, buttonhole or blanket stitch, running stitch, satin stitch, and cross stitch.[1] Those stitches remain the fundamental techniques of hand embroidery today.


History[edit]
 Detail of embroidered silk gauze ritual garment. Rows of even, round chain stitch used for outline and color. 4th century BC, Zhou tomb at Mashan, Hubei, China.
Origins[edit]
The process used to tailor, patch, mend and reinforce cloth fostered the development of sewing techniques, and the decorative possibilities of sewing led to the art of embroidery.[2] Indeed, the remarkable stability of basic embroidery stitches has been noted:

It is a striking fact that in the development of embroidery ... there are no changes of materials or techniques which can be felt or interpreted as advances from a primitive to a later, more refined stage. On the other hand, we often find in early works a technical accomplishment and high standard of craftsmanship rarely attained in later times.[3]
The art of embroidery has been found worldwide and several early examples have been found. Works in China have been dated to the Warring States period (5th–3rd century BC).[4] In a garment from Migration period Sweden, roughly 300–700 AD, the edges of bands of trimming are reinforced with running stitch, back stitch, stem stitch, tailor's buttonhole stitch, and Whip stitch, but it is uncertain whether this work simply reinforced the seams or should be interpreted as decorative embroidery.[5]

Historical applications and techniques[edit]
 A pair of Chinese shoes for bound 'lily' feet
Depending on time, location and materials available, embroidery could be the domain of a few experts or a widespread, popular technique. This flexibility led to a variety of works, from the royal to the mundane.
Elaborately embroidered clothing, religious objects, and household items often were seen as a mark of wealth and status, as in the case of Opus Anglicanum, a technique used by professional workshops and guilds in medieval England.[6] In 18th-century England and its colonies, samplers employing fine silks were produced by the daughters of wealthy families. Embroidery was a skill marking a girl's path into womanhood as well as conveying rank and social standing.[7]
Conversely, embroidery is also a Folk art, using materials that were accessible to nonprofessionals. Examples include Hardanger from Norway, Merezhka  from Ukraine, Mountmellick embroidery from Ireland, Nakshi kantha from Bangladesh and West Bengal, and Brazilian embroidery. Many techniques had a practical use such as Sashiko from Japan, which was used as a way to reinforce clothing.[8][9]
While historically viewed as a pastime, activity, or hobby, intended just for women, embroidery has often been used as a form of biography. Women who were unable to access a formal education or, at times, writing implements, were often taught embroidery and utilized it as a means of documenting their lives.[10] In terms of documenting the histories of marginalized groups, especially women of color both within the United States and around the world, embroidery is a means of studying the every day lives of those whose lives largely went unstudied throughout much of history.[11]

Embroidered books[edit]
 Embroidered book cover made by Elizabeth I at the age of 11, presented to Katherine Parr
In 16th century England, some fine books had embroidered bindings. The Bodleian Library in Oxford contains one presented to Queen Elizabeth I in 1583. It also owns a copy of The Epistles of Saint Paul, whose cover was reputedly embroidered by the Queen.[12]: 42 


The Islamic world[edit]
Further information: Islamic embroidery
 19th century women's thobe from Ramallah
Embroidery was an important art in the Medieval Islamic world. The 17th-century Turkish traveler Evliya Çelebi called it the "craft of the two hands". Because embroidery was a sign of high social status in Muslim societies, it became widely popular. In cities such as Damascus, Cairo and Istanbul, embroidery was visible on handkerchiefs, uniforms, flags, calligraphy, shoes, robes, tunics, horse trappings, slippers, sheaths, pouches, covers, and even on leather belts. Craftsmen embroidered items with gold and silver thread. Embroidery cottage industries, some employing over 800 people, grew to supply these items.[13]
In the 16th century, in the reign of the Mughal Emperor Akbar, his chronicler Abu al-Fazl ibn Mubarak wrote in the famous Ain-i-Akbari:
"His majesty (Akbar) pays much attention to various stuffs; hence Irani, Ottoman, and Mongolian articles of wear are in much abundance especially textiles embroidered in the patterns of Nakshi, Saadi, Chikhan, Ari, Zardozi, Wastli, Gota and Kohra. The imperial workshops in the towns of Lahore, Agra, Fatehpur and Ahmedabad turn out many masterpieces of workmanship in fabrics, and the figures and patterns, knots and variety of fashions which now prevail astonish even the most experienced travelers. Taste for fine material has since become general, and the drapery of embroidered fabrics used at feasts surpasses every description."[14]

Classification[edit]
Embroidery can be classified according to what degree the design takes into account the nature of the base material and by the relationship of stitch placement to the fabric. The main categories are free or surface embroidery, counted-thread embroidery, and needlepoint or canvas work.[15]
In free or surface embroidery, designs are applied without regard to the weave of the underlying fabric.  Examples include crewel and traditional Chinese and Japanese embroidery.
Counted-thread embroidery patterns are created by making stitches over a predetermined number of threads in the foundation fabric. Counted-thread embroidery is more easily worked on an even-weave foundation fabric such as embroidery canvas, aida cloth, or specially woven cotton and linen fabrics. Examples include cross-stitch and some forms of blackwork embroidery.
While similar to counted thread in regards to technique, in canvas work or needlepoint, threads are stitched through a fabric mesh to create a dense pattern that completely covers the foundation fabric.[16] Examples of canvas work include bargello and Berlin wool work.
Embroidery can also be classified by the similarity of its appearance. In drawn thread work and cutwork, the foundation fabric is deformed or cut away to create holes that are then embellished with embroidery, often with thread in the same color as the foundation fabric. When created with white thread on white linen or cotton, this work is collectively referred to as whitework.[17] However, whitework can either be counted or free. Hardanger embroidery is a counted embroidery and the designs are often geometric.[18] Conversely, styles such as Broderie anglaise are similar to free embroidery, with floral or Abstract art that are not dependent on the weave of the fabric.[19]

 Tea-cloth, Hungary, mid-20th century
Traditional hand embroidery around the world[edit]
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources.


Traditional embroidery

Origin

Stitches used

materials

Picture


Aari embroidery

Kashmir and Kutch, Gujarat, India

Chain stitch

Silk thread, fabric, beads or sequins




Art needlework

England








Assisi embroidery

Assisi, Italy

Back stitch, cross stitch, Holbein stitch

Cloth, red thread, silk, stranded perlé cotton




Balochi needlework

Balochistan, Pakistan



Beads, cloth, shisha, thread




Bargello

Florence, Italy

Vertical stitches (e.g. "flame stitch")

Linen or cotton canvas, wool floss or yarn




Berlin wool work

Berlin, Germany

Cross stitch or tent stitch

Linen or cotton canvas, wool floss or yarn




Blackwork

England

Backstitch, Holbein stitch, stem stitch

Linen or cotton fabric, black or red silk thread




Brazilian embroidery

Brazil

Bullion knots, cast-on stitch, drizzle stitch, French knots, feather stitch, fly stitch, stem stitch

Cloth, rayon thread




Broderie anglaise

Czechia

Buttonhole stitch, overcast stitch, satin stitch

White cloth and thread




Broderie perse

India



Chintz, thread




Candlewicking

United States

Knotted stitch, satin stitch[20]

Unbleached cotton thread, unbleached muslin




Chikan

Lucknow, India

Backstitches, chain stitches, shadow-work

Cloth, white thread




Colcha embroidery

Southwestern United States



Cotton or linen cloth, wool thread




Crewelwork

Great Britain

Chain stitch, couched stitches, knotted stitches, satin stitch, seed stitch, split stitch, stem stitch

Crewel yarn, linen twill




Goldwork

China

Couching, Holbein stitch, stem stitch

Cloth, metallic thread




Gota patti

Rajasthan, India








Gu Xiu

Shanghai, China



Silk cloth and thread




Hardanger embroidery

Norway

Buttonhole stitch, cable stitch, fly stitch, knotted stitch, picot, running stitch, satin stitch

White thread, white even-weave linen cloth




Hedebo embroidery

Hedebo, Zealand, Denmark



White linen cloth and thread




Kaitag textiles

Kaytagsky District, Dagestan, Russia

Laid-and-couched work

Cotton cloth, silk thread




Kalaga

Burma








Kantha

Eastern India



Old saris, thread




Kasidakari

India

Chain stitch, darning stitch, satin stitch, stem stitch






Kasuti

Karnataka, India

Cross stitch, double running stitch, running stitch, zigzag running stitch

Cotton thread and cloth




Khamak

Kandahar, Afghanistan

Satin stitch

Cotton or wool fabric, silk thread




Kuba textiles

The Congo

Embroidery, appliqué, cut-pile embroidery

Raffia cloth and thread




Kutch embroidery

Kutch, Gujarat, India



Cotton cloth, cotton or silk thread




Lambada embroidery

Banjara people








Mountmellick work

Mountmellick, County Laois, Ireland

Knotted stitches, padded stitches

White cotton cloth and thread




Opus anglicanum

England

Split stitch, surface couching, underside couching[21]

Linen or velvet cloth, metallic thread, silk thread




Opus teutonicum

Holy Roman Empire

Buttonhole stitch, chain stitch, goblien stitch, pulled work, satin stitch, stem stitch[22]

White linen cloth and thread[22]




Or nué

Western Europe

Couching

Fabric, metallic thread, silk thread




Orphrey










Needlepoint

Ancient Egypt

Cross stitch, tent stitch, brick stitch

Linen or cotton canvas, wool or silk floss or yarn




Phool Patti ka Kaam

Uttar Pradesh, India








Phulkari

Punjab

Darning stitches

Hand-spun cotton cloth, silk floss




Piteado

Central America



Ixtle or pita thread, leather




Quillwork

North America



Beads, cloth, feathers, feather quills, leather, porcupine quills




Rasht embroidery

Rasht, Gilan province, Iran

Chain stitch

Felt, silk thread




Redwork

United States

Backstitch, Outline stitch

Red thread, white cloth




Rushnyk

Slavs[23]

Cross stitch,[24] Holbein stitch, satin stitch[23]

Linen or hemp cloth, thread




Sashiko

Japan

Running stitch

Indigo-dyed cloth, white or red cotton thread




Sermeh embroidery

Achaemenid Persia



Termeh cloth, velvet, cotton fabrics, various threads




Sewed muslin

Scotland



Muslin, thread




Shu Xiu

Chengdu, Sichuan, China



Satin, silk thread




Smocking

England

Cable stitch, honeycomb stitches, knotted stitches, outline stitch, stem stitch, trellis stitch, wave stitch

Any fabric supple enough to be gathered, cotton or silk thread




Stumpwork

England








Su Xiu

Suzhou, Jiangsu, China



Silk cloth and thread




Suzani

Central Asia

Buttonhole stitches, chain stitches, couching,

Cotton fabric, silk thread




Tenango embroidery

Tenango de Doria, Hidalgo, Mexico








Velours du Kasaï

Kasai, the Congo








Xiang Xiu

Hunan, China



Silk cloth, black, white, and grey silk thread




Yue Xiu

Guangdong, China



Silk cloth and thread




Zardozi

Iran and India



Cloth, metallic thread




Zmijanje embroidery

Zmijanje, Bosnia and Herzegovina



Blue thread, white cloth[25]



Materials[edit]
 Multi-colored crewel wool threads on a panel of linen warp and cotton weft, 18th century English
A needle is the main stitching tool in embroidery, and comes in various sizes and types.[26] The fabrics and yarns used in traditional embroidery vary from place to place. Wool, linen, and silk have been in use for thousands of years for both fabric and yarn. Today, embroidery thread is manufactured in cotton, rayon, and novelty yarns as well as in traditional wool, linen, and silk. Ribbon embroidery uses narrow ribbon in silk or silk/organza blend ribbon, most commonly to create floral motifs.[27]
Surface embroidery techniques such as chain stitch and couching or laid-work are the most economical of expensive yarns; couching is generally used for goldwork. Canvas work techniques, in which large amounts of yarn are buried on the back of the work, use more materials but provide a sturdier and more substantial finished textile.[28]
In both canvas work and surface embroidery an embroidery hoop or frame can be used to stretch the material and ensure even stitching tension that prevents pattern distortion.[29] Modern canvas work tends to follow symmetrical counted stitching patterns with designs emerging from the repetition of one or just a few similar stitches in a variety of hues. In contrast, many forms of surface embroidery make use of a wide range of stitching patterns in a single piece of work.[30]

Machine embroidery[edit]
 Commercial machine embroidery in chain stitch on a voile curtain, China, early 21st century.
The development of machine embroidery and its mass production came about in stages during the Industrial Revolution. The first embroidery machine was the hand embroidery machine, invented in France in 1832 by Josué Heilmann.[31] The next evolutionary step was the schiffli embroidery machine. The latter borrowed from the sewing machine and the Jacquard loom to fully automate its operation. The manufacture of machine-made embroideries in St. Gallen in eastern Switzerland flourished in the latter half of the 19th century.[32]  Both St. Gallen, Switzerland and Plauen, Germany were important centers for machine embroidery and embroidery machine development.  Many Swiss and Germans immigrated to Hudson county, New Jersey in the early twentieth century and developed a machine embroidery industry there.  Shiffli machines have continued to evolve and are still used for industrial scale embroidery.[33]
Contemporary embroidery is stitched with a computerized embroidery machine using patterns digitized with embroidery software. In machine embroidery, different types of "fills" add texture and design to the finished work. Machine embroidery is used to add logos and monograms to business shirts or jackets, gifts, and team apparel as well as to decorate household linens, draperies, and decorator fabrics that mimic the elaborate hand embroidery of the past.
Machine embroidery is most typically done with rayon thread, although polyester thread can also be used. Cotton thread, on the other hand, is prone to breaking and should be avoided if under 30 wt.[34]
There has also been a development in free hand machine embroidery, new machines have been designed that allow for the user to create free-motion embroidery which has its place in textile arts, quilting, dressmaking, home furnishings and more. Users can use the embroidery software to digitize the digital embroidery designs. These digitized design are then transferred to the embroidery machine with the help of a flash drive and then the embroidery machine embroiders the selected design onto the fabric.

Resurgence of hand embroidery[edit]
 Japanese free embroidery in silk and metal threads, contemporary.
 Hardanger, a whitework technique. Contemporary.
Since the late 2010s, there has been an exponential growth in the popularity of embroidering by hand. As a result of visual media such as Pinterest and Instagram, artists are able to share their work more extensively, which has inspired younger generations to pick up needle and threads.
Contemporary embroidery artists believe hand embroidery has grown in popularity as a result of an increasing need for relaxation and digitally disconnecting practices.[35]
Modern hand embroidery, as opposed to cross-stitching, is characterized by a more "liberal" approach, where stitches are more freely combined in unconventional ways to create various textures and designs.

In literature[edit]
In Greek mythology the goddess Athena is said to have passed down the art of embroidery (along with weaving) to humans, leading to the famed competition between herself and the mortal Arachne.[36]

Qualifications[edit]
City and Guilds qualification[37] in embroidery allows embroiderers to become recognized for their skill. This qualification also gives them the credibility to teach. For example, the notable textiles artist, Kathleen Laurel Sage,[38] began her teaching career by getting the City and Guilds Embroidery 1 and 2 qualifications. She has since gone on to write a book on the subject.[39]

Gallery[edit]




Traditional embroidery in chain stitch on a Kazakh rug, contemporary.






Caucasian embroidery






English cope, late 15th or early 16th century. Silk velvet embroidered with silk and gold threads, closely laid and couched. Contemporary Art Institute of Chicago textile collection.






Extremely fine underlay of St. Gallen Embroidery






Traditional Turkish embroidery. Izmir Ethnography Museum, Turkey.






Traditional Croatian embroidery.






Decorated Easter eggs from the Luhansk region of Ukraine






Gold embroidery on a gognots (apron) of a 19th-century Armenian bridal dress from Akhaltsikhe






Brightly coloured Korean embroidery.






Uzbekistan embroidery on a traditional women's parandja robe.






Woman wearing a traditional embroidered Kalash headdress, Pakistan.






Bookmark of black fabric with multicolored Bedouin embroidery and tassel of embroidery floss






Chain-stitch embroidery from England circa 1775






Traditional Bulgarian Floral embrodery from Sofia and Trun.






A 1919 painting depicting the Brazilian flag being embroidered by a family.




See also[edit]
Broderie de Fontenoy-le-Château
Chikankari
Chinese embroidery
Embroidery of India
Khamak
Mary Ann Beinecke Decorative Art Collection
Sachet (scented bag)
Sampler (needlework)
Sichuan embroidery
Notes[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "Top 12 Basic Hand Embroidery Stitches". Sarah's Hand Embroidery Tutorials. Retrieved 2020-05-06.

^ Gillow & Sentance 1999, p. 12.

^ Marie Schuette and Sigrid Muller-Christensen, The Art of Embroidery translated by Donald King, Thames and Hudson, 1964, quoted in Netherton & Owen-Crocker 2005, p. 2.

^ Gillow & Sentance 1999, p. 178.

^ Coatsworth, Elizabeth: "Stitches in Time: Establishing a History of Anglo-Saxon Embroidery", in Netherton & Owen-Crocker 2005, p. 2.

^ Levey & King 1993, p. 12.

^ Power, Lisa (27 March 2015). "NGV embroidery exhibition: imagine a 12-year-old spending two years on this..." The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 30 May 2015.

^ "Handa City Sashiko Program at the Society for Contemporary Craft". Japan-America Society of Pennsylvania. 7 Oct 2016. Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2018.

^ Siddle, Kat. "Sashiko". Seamwork Magazine. Colette Media, LLC. Retrieved 2018-01-26.

^ Murphy, A. Mary (July 2003). "The Theory and Practice of Counting Stitches as Stories: Material Evidences of Autobiography in Needlework". Women's Studies. 32 (5): 641–655. doi:10.1080/00497870390207149. S2CID 143527585.

^ van der Merwe, Ria (November 2017). "From a silent past to a spoken future. Black women's voices in the archival process". Archives and Records. 40: 239–258. doi:10.1080/23257962.2017.1388224.

^ Harriet Bridgeman; Elizabeth Drury (1978). Needlework : an illustrated history. New York: Paddington Press. ISBN 0-448-22066-0. OCLC 3843144.

^ Stone, Caroline (May–June 2007). "The Skill of the Two Hands". Saudi Aramco World. Vol. 58, no. 3.

^ Werner, Louis (July–August 2011). "Mughal Maal". Saudi Aramco World. Vol. 62, no. 4. Archived from the original on 2016-02-22. Retrieved 2011-08-11.

^ Corbet, Mary (October 3, 2016). "Needlework Terminology: Surface Embroidery". Retrieved November 1, 2016.

^ Gillow & Sentance 1999, p. 198.

^ Reader's Digest 1979, pp. 74–91.

^ Yvette Stanton (30 March 2016). Early Style Hardanger. Vetty Creations. ISBN 978-0-9757677-7-1.

^ Catherine Amoroso Leslie (1 January 2007). Needlework Through History: An Encyclopedia. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 34, 226, 58. ISBN 978-0-313-33548-8. Retrieved 13 September 2013.

^ "The History and Technique of Candlewicking and Whitework". Needlepointers.com. 2020-10-27. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ "Technique - Opus Anglicanum". medieval.webcon.net.au. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ a b "Technique - Opus Teutonicum". medieval.webcon.net.au. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ a b K, Roman (2012-08-07). "FolkCostume&Embroidery: Rushnyk embroidery of southern East Podillia". FolkCostume&Embroidery. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ K, Roman (2014-07-01). "FolkCostume&Embroidery: Ukrainian Rose Embroidery". FolkCostume&Embroidery. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ "UNESCO - Zmijanje embroidery". ich.unesco.org. Retrieved 2022-04-16.

^ "Needles". Sarah's Hand Embroidery Tutorials. Retrieved 2020-05-06.

^ van Niekerk 2006.

^ Reader's Digest 1979, pp. 112–115.

^ "Materials Required for Hand Embroidery". Sarah's Hand Embroidery Tutorials. Retrieved 2020-05-06.

^ Reader's Digest 1979, pp. 1–19, 112–117.

^ Willem. "Hand Embroidery Machine". trc-leiden.nl. Retrieved 2019-02-19.

^ Röllin, Peter. Stickerei-Zeit, Kultur und Kunst in St. Gallen 1870–1930. VGS Verlagsgemeinschaft, St. Gallen 1989, ISBN 3-7291-1052-7 (in German)

^ Schneider, Coleman (1968). Machine Made Embroideries. Globe Lithographing Company.

^ "Choosing Machine-Embroidery Threads". Threads Magazine. The Taunton Press, Inc. 2008-11-02. Retrieved 2018-11-27.

^ Elin (2019-06-11). "History of embroidery and its rise in popularity". Charles and Elin. Retrieved 2019-07-25.

^ Synge, Lanto (2001). Art of Embroidery: History of Style and Technique. Woodbridge, England: Antique Collectors' Club. p. 32. ISBN 9781851493593.

^ "Creative". City & Guilds.

^ "A Little About Me". Kathleen Laurel Sage. 15 February 2017.

^ The Zen Cart® Team;  et al. "Embroidered Soldered and Heat Zapped Surfaces by Kathleen Laurel Sage".


Bibliography[edit]
Gillow, John; Sentance, Bryan (1999). World Textiles. Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown. ISBN 0-8212-2621-5.
Levey, S. M.; King, D. (1993). The Victoria and Albert Museum's Textile Collection Vol. 3: Embroidery in Britain from 1200 to 1750. Victoria and Albert Museum. ISBN 1-85177-126-3.
Netherton, Robin; Owen-Crocker, Gale R., eds. (2005). Medieval Clothing and Textiles, Volume 1. Boydell Press. ISBN 1-84383-123-6.
Complete Guide to Needlework. Reader's Digest. 1979. ISBN 0-89577-059-8.
van Niekerk, Di (2006). A Perfect World in Ribbon Embroidery and Stumpwork. ISBN 1-84448-231-6.
Further reading[edit]
Berman, Pat (2000). "Berlin Work". American Needlepoint Guild. Archived from the original on 2009-02-06. Retrieved 2009-01-24.
Caulfeild, S.F.A.; B.C. Saward (1885). The Dictionary of Needlework.
Crummy, Andrew (2010). The Prestonpans Tapestry 1745. Burke's Peerage & Gentry, for Battle of Prestonpans (1745) Heritage Trust.
Embroiderers' Guild Practical Study Group (1984). Needlework School. QED Publishers. ISBN 0-89009-785-2.
Koll, Juby Aleyas (2019). Sarah's Hand Embroidery Tutorials.
Lemon, Jane (2004). Metal Thread Embroidery. Sterling. ISBN 0-7134-8926-X.
Vogelsang, Gillian; Vogelsang, Willem, eds. (2015). TRC Needles. The TRC Digital Encyclopaedia of Decorative Needlework. Leiden, The Netherlands: Textile Research Centre.
Wilson, David M. (1985). The Bayeux Tapestry. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-25122-3.
External links[edit]
 Media related to Embroidery at Wikimedia Commons



Look up embroider in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The History of Embroidery
vteEmbroideryStyles
Assisi
Bargello
Berlin work
Blackwork
Broderie anglaise
Broderie perse
Candlewicking
Counted-thread
Crewel
Cross-stitch
Cutwork
Darning
Drawn thread work
Goldwork
Hardanger
Hedebo
Machine
Needlepoint
Quillwork
Smocking
Stumpwork
Surface
Suzani
Whitework
Stitches
Backstitch
Blanket
Box
Buttonhole
Chain stitch
Couching and laid work
Cross stitches
Embroidery stitch
Featherstitch
Holbein
Parisian
Running
Satin stitch
Sashiko
Shisha
Straight stitch
Tent stitch
Tools and materials
Aida cloth
Embroidery hoop
Embroidery thread
Evenweave
Perforated paper
Plainweave
Plastic canvas
Sampler
Slip
Yarn
Regionaland historical
Art needlework
Balochi
Brazilian
Bunka shishu
Burmese
Chikan
Chinese
Cantonese
Sichuan
Suzhou
Xiang
English
Indian
Islamic
Jacobean
Sashiko
Kogin-zashi
Bunka shishu
Kaitag
Kantha
Kasuti
Korean
Macedonian
Mountmellick
Nakshi kantha
Persian
Rasht
Sermeh
Sistan
Zardozi
Opus Anglicanum
Rushnyk
Sewed muslin
Ukrainian
Vietnamese
Vyshyvanka
Embroideries
Butler-Bowden Cope
Bayeux Tapestry
Bradford carpet
Great Tapestry of Scotland
Great Tapestry of Scotland: People's Panel
Hastings Embroidery
Hestia tapestry
Magna Carta (An Embroidery)
Margaret Layton's jacket
New World Tapestry
Overlord Embroidery
Oxburgh Hangings
Prestonpans Tapestry
Quaker Tapestry
Scottish Diaspora Tapestry
Fragments of a Cope with the Seven Sacraments
Designersand embroiderers
Emilie Bach
Leon Conrad
Shahin Ebrahimzadeh-Pezeshki
Kaffe Fassett
Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty
Constance Howard
Marilyn Leavitt-Imblum
François Lesage
Ann Macbeth
May Morris
Jessie Newbery
Mahtab Norouzi
Tetiana Protcheva
Charles Germain de Saint Aubin
Mary Elizabeth Turner
Dimitri Vlachos - Castano
Kathleen Whyte
Erica Wilson
Lily Yeats
Organizationsand museums
Embroiderers' Guild (UK)
Embroiderers' Guild of America
Embroidery Software Protection Coalition
Needlework Development Scheme
Royal School of Needlework
Wemyss School of Needlework
Chung Young Yang Embroidery Museum 
Han Sang Soo Embroidery Museum
Related
Appliqué
Crochet
Knitting
Lace
Needlework
Quilting

vteSewingTechniques
Basting
Cut
Darning
Ease
Embellishment
Fabric tube turning
Floating canvas
Gather
Godet
Gusset
Heirloom sewing
Shirring
Stitches
List of sewing stitches
Backstitch
Bar tack
Blanket
Blind stitch
Buttonhole
Catch stitch
Chain stitch
Coverstitch
Cross-stitch
Embroidery stitch
Hemstitch
Lockstitch
Overlock
Pad stitch
Pick stitch
Rantering
Running
Sashiko
Stoating
Tack
Topstitch
Zigzag
Seams
Neckline
Felled seam
Seam allowance
Style line
NotionsTrim
Bias tape
Collar stay
Elastic
Galloon
Grommet / Eyelet
Interfacing
Passementerie
Piping
Ruffle
Rickrack
Self-fabric
Soutache
Twill tape
Wrights
Closures
Buckle
Button
Buttonhole
Frog
Hook-and-eye
Hook-and-loop fastener
Shank
Snap
Zipper
Materials
Grain / Bias
Selvage
Textile / Fabric
Thread
Yarn
Tools
Bobbin
Dress form
Needlecase
Needle threader
Pattern notcher
Pin
Pincushion
Pinking shears
Scissors
Seam ripper
Sewing gauge
Sewing needle
Stitching awl
Tailor's ham
Tape measure
Thimble
Tracing paper
Tracing wheel
TradesSuppliers
Cloth merchant
Draper
Dressmaker
Haberdasher
Mercer
Sewing occupations
Tailor
Sewing machinemanufacturers
List of brands and companies
Barthélemy Thimonnier
Bernina International
Brother Industries
Elias Howe
Elna
Feiyue
Frister & Rossmann
Janome
Jones Sewing Machine Company
Juki
Merrow
New Home
Pfaff
Sewmor
Singer
Tape edge machine
Viking / Husqvarna
White
Pattern manufacturers
Butterick
Burda
Clothkits
McCall's
Simplicity

 Media related to Sewing at Wikimedia Commons
 Clothing portal
Glossary of terms

vteDecorative arts and handicrafts
History
Textile
Banner-making
Canvas work
Crocheting
Cross-stitch
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving
Paper
Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage
Decoupage
Papier collé
Photomontage
Iris folding
Jianzhi
Kamikiri
Origami
Kirigami
Moneygami
Embossing
Marbling
Papercraft
Papercutting
Chinese
Jewish
Slavic
Papermaking
Paper toys
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper
Wood
Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning
Ceramic
Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta
Glass
Cameo glass
Enamelled glass
Glass etching
Glassware
Stained glass
Chip work
Metal
Chemical milling
Enamel
Engraving
Etching
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith
Bronze and brass ornamental work
Ironwork
Other
Assemblage
Balloon modelling
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Faux painting
Grotesque
Gargoyle
Hardstone carving
Lath art
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic
Glass mosaic
Ornament
Pargeting
Pietra dura
Private press
Pressed flower craft
Qing handicrafts
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal

Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
2
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
IdRef





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Embroidery&oldid=1148624983"
Categories: EmbroideryDecorative artsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataDynamic listsCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiers






 This page was last edited on 7 April 2023, at 09:45 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement












Embroidery - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title . Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide ( Top ) 1History Toggle History subsection 1 . 1Origins 1 . 2Historical applications and techniques 1 . 2 . 1Embroidered books 1 . 2 . 2The Islamic world 2Classification 3Traditional hand embroidery around the world 4Materials 5Machine embroidery 6Resurgence of hand embroidery 7In literature 8Qualifications 9Gallery 10See also 11Notes Toggle Notes subsection 11 . 1Citations 11 . 2Bibliography 12Further reading 13External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Embroidery 63 languages AfrikaansÆngliscالعربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilge한국어ՀայերենBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתಕನ ್ ನಡҚазақшаKurdîКыргызчаLatinaMagyarമലയ ാ ള ം मर ा ठ ी Bahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ PolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSicilianuSimple EnglishسنڌيSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதம ி ழ ் త ె ల ు గ ు ТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item Print / export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia Art or handicraft of decorating fabric or other materials with needle and thread or yarn This article is about handcraft . For Bradbury ' s short story , see Embroidery ( short story ). Laid threads , a surface technique in wool on linen . The Bayeux Tapestry , 11th century . Embroidery is the craft of decorating fabric or other materials using a needle to apply thread or yarn . Embroidery may also incorporate other materials such as pearls , beads , quills , and sequins . In modern days , embroidery is usually seen on caps , hats , coats , overlays , blankets , dress shirts , denim , dresses , stockings , scarfs , and golf shirts . Embroidery is available in a wide variety of thread or yarn colour . It is often used to personalize gifts or clothing items . Some of the basic techniques or stitches of the earliest embroidery are chain stitch , buttonhole or blanket stitch , running stitch , satin stitch , and cross stitch .[ 1 ] Those stitches remain the fundamental techniques of hand embroidery today . History [ edit ] Detail of embroidered silk gauze ritual garment . Rows of even , round chain stitch used for outline and color . 4th century BC , Zhou tomb at Mashan , Hubei , China . Origins [ edit ] The process used to tailor , patch , mend and reinforce cloth fostered the development of sewing techniques , and the decorative possibilities of sewing led to the art of embroidery .[ 2 ] Indeed , the remarkable stability of basic embroidery stitches has been noted : It is a striking fact that in the development of embroidery ... there are no changes of materials or techniques which can be felt or interpreted as advances from a primitive to a later , more refined stage . On the other hand , we often find in early works a technical accomplishment and high standard of craftsmanship rarely attained in later times .[ 3 ] The art of embroidery has been found worldwide and several early examples have been found . Works in China have been dated to the Warring States period ( 5th – 3rd century BC ).[ 4 ] In a garment from Migration period Sweden , roughly 300 – 700 AD , the edges of bands of trimming are reinforced with running stitch , back stitch , stem stitch , tailor ' s buttonhole stitch , and Whip stitch , but it is uncertain whether this work simply reinforced the seams or should be interpreted as decorative embroidery .[ 5 ] Historical applications and techniques [ edit ] A pair of Chinese shoes for bound ' lily ' feet Depending on time , location and materials available , embroidery could be the domain of a few experts or a widespread , popular technique . This flexibility led to a variety of works , from the royal to the mundane . Elaborately embroidered clothing , religious objects , and household items often were seen as a mark of wealth and status , as in the case of Opus Anglicanum , a technique used by professional workshops and guilds in medieval England .[ 6 ] In 18th - century England and its colonies , samplers employing fine silks were produced by the daughters of wealthy families . Embroidery was a skill marking a girl ' s path into womanhood as well as conveying rank and social standing .[ 7 ] Conversely , embroidery is also a Folk art , using materials that were accessible to nonprofessionals . Examples include Hardanger from Norway , Merezhka from Ukraine , Mountmellick embroidery from Ireland , Nakshi kantha from Bangladesh and West Bengal , and Brazilian embroidery . Many techniques had a practical use such as Sashiko from Japan , which was used as a way to reinforce clothing .[ 8 ][ 9 ] While historically viewed as a pastime , activity , or hobby , intended just for women , embroidery has often been used as a form of biography . Women who were unable to access a formal education or , at times , writing implements , were often taught embroidery and utilized it as a means of documenting their lives .[ 10 ] In terms of documenting the histories of marginalized groups , especially women of color both within the United States and around the world , embroidery is a means of studying the every day lives of those whose lives largely went unstudied throughout much of history .[ 11 ] Embroidered books [ edit ] Embroidered book cover made by Elizabeth I at the age of 11 , presented to Katherine Parr In 16th century England , some fine books had embroidered bindings . The Bodleian Library in Oxford contains one presented to Queen Elizabeth I in 1583 . It also owns a copy of The Epistles of Saint Paul , whose cover was reputedly embroidered by the Queen .[ 12 ]: 42 The Islamic world [ edit ] Further information : Islamic embroidery 19th century women ' s thobe from Ramallah Embroidery was an important art in the Medieval Islamic world . The 17th - century Turkish traveler Evliya Çelebi called it the " craft of the two hands ". Because embroidery was a sign of high social status in Muslim societies , it became widely popular . In cities such as Damascus , Cairo and Istanbul , embroidery was visible on handkerchiefs , uniforms , flags , calligraphy , shoes , robes , tunics , horse trappings , slippers , sheaths , pouches , covers , and even on leather belts . Craftsmen embroidered items with gold and silver thread . Embroidery cottage industries , some employing over 800 people , grew to supply these items .[ 13 ] In the 16th century , in the reign of the Mughal Emperor Akbar , his chronicler Abu al - Fazl ibn Mubarak wrote in the famous Ain - i - Akbari : " His majesty ( Akbar ) pays much attention to various stuffs ; hence Irani , Ottoman , and Mongolian articles of wear are in much abundance especially textiles embroidered in the patterns of Nakshi , Saadi , Chikhan , Ari , Zardozi , Wastli , Gota and Kohra . The imperial workshops in the towns of Lahore , Agra , Fatehpur and Ahmedabad turn out many masterpieces of workmanship in fabrics , and the figures and patterns , knots and variety of fashions which now prevail astonish even the most experienced travelers . Taste for fine material has since become general , and the drapery of embroidered fabrics used at feasts surpasses every description ."[ 14 ] Classification [ edit ] Embroidery can be classified according to what degree the design takes into account the nature of the base material and by the relationship of stitch placement to the fabric . The main categories are free or surface embroidery , counted - thread embroidery , and needlepoint or canvas work .[ 15 ] In free or surface embroidery , designs are applied without regard to the weave of the underlying fabric . Examples include crewel and traditional Chinese and Japanese embroidery . Counted - thread embroidery patterns are created by making stitches over a predetermined number of threads in the foundation fabric . Counted - thread embroidery is more easily worked on an even - weave foundation fabric such as embroidery canvas , aida cloth , or specially woven cotton and linen fabrics . Examples include cross - stitch and some forms of blackwork embroidery . While similar to counted thread in regards to technique , in canvas work or needlepoint , threads are stitched through a fabric mesh to create a dense pattern that completely covers the foundation fabric .[ 16 ] Examples of canvas work include bargello and Berlin wool work . Embroidery can also be classified by the similarity of its appearance . In drawn thread work and cutwork , the foundation fabric is deformed or cut away to create holes that are then embellished with embroidery , often with thread in the same color as the foundation fabric . When created with white thread on white linen or cotton , this work is collectively referred to as whitework .[ 17 ] However , whitework can either be counted or free . Hardanger embroidery is a counted embroidery and the designs are often geometric .[ 18 ] Conversely , styles such as Broderie anglaise are similar to free embroidery , with floral or Abstract art that are not dependent on the weave of the fabric .[ 19 ] Tea - cloth , Hungary , mid - 20th century Traditional hand embroidery around the world [ edit ] This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness . You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources . Traditional embroidery Origin Stitches used materials Picture Aari embroidery Kashmir and Kutch , Gujarat , India Chain stitch Silk thread , fabric , beads or sequins Art needlework England Assisi embroidery Assisi , Italy Back stitch , cross stitch , Holbein stitch Cloth , red thread , silk , stranded perlé cotton Balochi needlework Balochistan , Pakistan Beads , cloth , shisha , thread Bargello Florence , Italy Vertical stitches ( e . g . " flame stitch ") Linen or cotton canvas , wool floss or yarn Berlin wool work Berlin , Germany Cross stitch or tent stitch Linen or cotton canvas , wool floss or yarn Blackwork England Backstitch , Holbein stitch , stem stitch Linen or cotton fabric , black or red silk thread Brazilian embroidery Brazil Bullion knots , cast - on stitch , drizzle stitch , French knots , feather stitch , fly stitch , stem stitch Cloth , rayon thread Broderie anglaise Czechia Buttonhole stitch , overcast stitch , satin stitch White cloth and thread Broderie perse India Chintz , thread Candlewicking United States Knotted stitch , satin stitch [ 20 ] Unbleached cotton thread , unbleached muslin Chikan Lucknow , India Backstitches , chain stitches , shadow - work Cloth , white thread Colcha embroidery Southwestern United States Cotton or linen cloth , wool thread Crewelwork Great Britain Chain stitch , couched stitches , knotted stitches , satin stitch , seed stitch , split stitch , stem stitch Crewel yarn , linen twill Goldwork China Couching , Holbein stitch , stem stitch Cloth , metallic thread Gota patti Rajasthan , India Gu Xiu Shanghai , China Silk cloth and thread Hardanger embroidery Norway Buttonhole stitch , cable stitch , fly stitch , knotted stitch , picot , running stitch , satin stitch White thread , white even - weave linen cloth Hedebo embroidery Hedebo , Zealand , Denmark White linen cloth and thread Kaitag textiles Kaytagsky District , Dagestan , Russia Laid - and - couched work Cotton cloth , silk thread Kalaga Burma Kantha Eastern India Old saris , thread Kasidakari India Chain stitch , darning stitch , satin stitch , stem stitch Kasuti Karnataka , India Cross stitch , double running stitch , running stitch , zigzag running stitch Cotton thread and cloth Khamak Kandahar , Afghanistan Satin stitch Cotton or wool fabric , silk thread Kuba textiles The Congo Embroidery , appliqué , cut - pile embroidery Raffia cloth and thread Kutch embroidery Kutch , Gujarat , India Cotton cloth , cotton or silk thread Lambada embroidery Banjara people Mountmellick work Mountmellick , County Laois , Ireland Knotted stitches , padded stitches White cotton cloth and thread Opus anglicanum England Split stitch , surface couching , underside couching [ 21 ] Linen or velvet cloth , metallic thread , silk thread Opus teutonicum Holy Roman Empire Buttonhole stitch , chain stitch , goblien stitch , pulled work , satin stitch , stem stitch [ 22 ] White linen cloth and thread [ 22 ] Or nué Western Europe Couching Fabric , metallic thread , silk thread Orphrey Needlepoint Ancient Egypt Cross stitch , tent stitch , brick stitch Linen or cotton canvas , wool or silk floss or yarn Phool Patti ka Kaam Uttar Pradesh , India Phulkari Punjab Darning stitches Hand - spun cotton cloth , silk floss Piteado Central America Ixtle or pita thread , leather Quillwork North America Beads , cloth , feathers , feather quills , leather , porcupine quills Rasht embroidery Rasht , Gilan province , Iran Chain stitch Felt , silk thread Redwork United States Backstitch , Outline stitch Red thread , white cloth Rushnyk Slavs [ 23 ] Cross stitch ,[ 24 ] Holbein stitch , satin stitch [ 23 ] Linen or hemp cloth , thread Sashiko Japan Running stitch Indigo - dyed cloth , white or red cotton thread Sermeh embroidery Achaemenid Persia Termeh cloth , velvet , cotton fabrics , various threads Sewed muslin Scotland Muslin , thread Shu Xiu Chengdu , Sichuan , China Satin , silk thread Smocking England Cable stitch , honeycomb stitches , knotted stitches , outline stitch , stem stitch , trellis stitch , wave stitch Any fabric supple enough to be gathered , cotton or silk thread Stumpwork England Su Xiu Suzhou , Jiangsu , China Silk cloth and thread Suzani Central Asia Buttonhole stitches , chain stitches , couching , Cotton fabric , silk thread Tenango embroidery Tenango de Doria , Hidalgo , Mexico Velours du Kasaï Kasai , the Congo Xiang Xiu Hunan , China Silk cloth , black , white , and grey silk thread Yue Xiu Guangdong , China Silk cloth and thread Zardozi Iran and India Cloth , metallic thread Zmijanje embroidery Zmijanje , Bosnia and Herzegovina Blue thread , white cloth [ 25 ] Materials [ edit ] Multi - colored crewel wool threads on a panel of linen warp and cotton weft , 18th century English A needle is the main stitching tool in embroidery , and comes in various sizes and types .[ 26 ] The fabrics and yarns used in traditional embroidery vary from place to place . Wool , linen , and silk have been in use for thousands of years for both fabric and yarn . Today , embroidery thread is manufactured in cotton , rayon , and novelty yarns as well as in traditional wool , linen , and silk . Ribbon embroidery uses narrow ribbon in silk or silk / organza blend ribbon , most commonly to create floral motifs .[ 27 ] Surface embroidery techniques such as chain stitch and couching or laid - work are the most economical of expensive yarns ; couching is generally used for goldwork . Canvas work techniques , in which large amounts of yarn are buried on the back of the work , use more materials but provide a sturdier and more substantial finished textile .[ 28 ] In both canvas work and surface embroidery an embroidery hoop or frame can be used to stretch the material and ensure even stitching tension that prevents pattern distortion .[ 29 ] Modern canvas work tends to follow symmetrical counted stitching patterns with designs emerging from the repetition of one or just a few similar stitches in a variety of hues . In contrast , many forms of surface embroidery make use of a wide range of stitching patterns in a single piece of work .[ 30 ] Machine embroidery [ edit ] Commercial machine embroidery in chain stitch on a voile curtain , China , early 21st century . The development of machine embroidery and its mass production came about in stages during the Industrial Revolution . The first embroidery machine was the hand embroidery machine , invented in France in 1832 by Josué Heilmann .[ 31 ] The next evolutionary step was the schiffli embroidery machine . The latter borrowed from the sewing machine and the Jacquard loom to fully automate its operation . The manufacture of machine - made embroideries in St . Gallen in eastern Switzerland flourished in the latter half of the 19th century .[ 32 ] Both St . Gallen , Switzerland and Plauen , Germany were important centers for machine embroidery and embroidery machine development . Many Swiss and Germans immigrated to Hudson county , New Jersey in the early twentieth century and developed a machine embroidery industry there . Shiffli machines have continued to evolve and are still used for industrial scale embroidery .[ 33 ] Contemporary embroidery is stitched with a computerized embroidery machine using patterns digitized with embroidery software . In machine embroidery , different types of " fills " add texture and design to the finished work . Machine embroidery is used to add logos and monograms to business shirts or jackets , gifts , and team apparel as well as to decorate household linens , draperies , and decorator fabrics that mimic the elaborate hand embroidery of the past . Machine embroidery is most typically done with rayon thread , although polyester thread can also be used . Cotton thread , on the other hand , is prone to breaking and should be avoided if under 30 wt .[ 34 ] There has also been a development in free hand machine embroidery , new machines have been designed that allow for the user to create free - motion embroidery which has its place in textile arts , quilting , dressmaking , home furnishings and more . Users can use the embroidery software to digitize the digital embroidery designs . These digitized design are then transferred to the embroidery machine with the help of a flash drive and then the embroidery machine embroiders the selected design onto the fabric . Resurgence of hand embroidery [ edit ] Japanese free embroidery in silk and metal threads , contemporary . Hardanger , a whitework technique . Contemporary . Since the late 2010s , there has been an exponential growth in the popularity of embroidering by hand . As a result of visual media such as Pinterest and Instagram , artists are able to share their work more extensively , which has inspired younger generations to pick up needle and threads . Contemporary embroidery artists believe hand embroidery has grown in popularity as a result of an increasing need for relaxation and digitally disconnecting practices .[ 35 ] Modern hand embroidery , as opposed to cross - stitching , is characterized by a more " liberal " approach , where stitches are more freely combined in unconventional ways to create various textures and designs . In literature [ edit ] In Greek mythology the goddess Athena is said to have passed down the art of embroidery ( along with weaving ) to humans , leading to the famed competition between herself and the mortal Arachne .[ 36 ] Qualifications [ edit ] City and Guilds qualification [ 37 ] in embroidery allows embroiderers to become recognized for their skill . This qualification also gives them the credibility to teach . For example , the notable textiles artist , Kathleen Laurel Sage ,[ 38 ] began her teaching career by getting the City and Guilds Embroidery 1 and 2 qualifications . She has since gone on to write a book on the subject .[ 39 ] Gallery [ edit ] Traditional embroidery in chain stitch on a Kazakh rug , contemporary . Caucasian embroidery English cope , late 15th or early 16th century . Silk velvet embroidered with silk and gold threads , closely laid and couched . Contemporary Art Institute of Chicago textile collection . Extremely fine underlay of St . Gallen Embroidery Traditional Turkish embroidery . Izmir Ethnography Museum , Turkey . Traditional Croatian embroidery . Decorated Easter eggs from the Luhansk region of Ukraine Gold embroidery on a gognots ( apron ) of a 19th - century Armenian bridal dress from Akhaltsikhe Brightly coloured Korean embroidery . Uzbekistan embroidery on a traditional women ' s parandja robe . Woman wearing a traditional embroidered Kalash headdress , Pakistan . Bookmark of black fabric with multicolored Bedouin embroidery and tassel of embroidery floss Chain - stitch embroidery from England circa 1775 Traditional Bulgarian Floral embrodery from Sofia and Trun . A 1919 painting depicting the Brazilian flag being embroidered by a family . See also [ edit ] Broderie de Fontenoy - le - Château Chikankari Chinese embroidery Embroidery of India Khamak Mary Ann Beinecke Decorative Art Collection Sachet ( scented bag ) Sampler ( needlework ) Sichuan embroidery Notes [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ " Top 12 Basic Hand Embroidery Stitches ". Sarah ' s Hand Embroidery Tutorials . Retrieved 2020 - 05 - 06 . ^ Gillow & Sentance 1999 , p . 12 . ^ Marie Schuette and Sigrid Muller - Christensen , The Art of Embroidery translated by Donald King , Thames and Hudson , 1964 , quoted in Netherton & Owen - Crocker 2005 , p . 2 . ^ Gillow & Sentance 1999 , p . 178 . ^ Coatsworth , Elizabeth : " Stitches in Time : Establishing a History of Anglo - Saxon Embroidery ", in Netherton & Owen - Crocker 2005 , p . 2 . ^ Levey & King 1993 , p . 12 . ^ Power , Lisa ( 27 March 2015 ). " NGV embroidery exhibition : imagine a 12 - year - old spending two years on this ..." The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ " Handa City Sashiko Program at the Society for Contemporary Craft ". Japan - America Society of Pennsylvania . 7 Oct 2016 . Archived from the original on 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 25 January 2018 . ^ Siddle , Kat . " Sashiko ". Seamwork Magazine . Colette Media , LLC . Retrieved 2018 - 01 - 26 . ^ Murphy , A . Mary ( July 2003 ). " The Theory and Practice of Counting Stitches as Stories : Material Evidences of Autobiography in Needlework ". Women ' s Studies . 32 ( 5 ): 641 – 655 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00497870390207149 . S2CID 143527585 . ^ van der Merwe , Ria ( November 2017 ). " From a silent past to a spoken future . Black women ' s voices in the archival process ". Archives and Records . 40 : 239 – 258 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 23257962 . 2017 . 1388224 . ^ Harriet Bridgeman ; Elizabeth Drury ( 1978 ). Needlework : an illustrated history . New York : Paddington Press . ISBN 0 - 448 - 22066 - 0 . OCLC 3843144 . ^ Stone , Caroline ( May – June 2007 ). " The Skill of the Two Hands ". Saudi Aramco World . Vol . 58 , no . 3 . ^ Werner , Louis ( July – August 2011 ). " Mughal Maal ". Saudi Aramco World . Vol . 62 , no . 4 . Archived from the original on 2016 - 02 - 22 . Retrieved 2011 - 08 - 11 . ^ Corbet , Mary ( October 3 , 2016 ). " Needlework Terminology : Surface Embroidery ". Retrieved November 1 , 2016 . ^ Gillow & Sentance 1999 , p . 198 . ^ Reader ' s Digest 1979 , pp . 74 – 91 . ^ Yvette Stanton ( 30 March 2016 ). Early Style Hardanger . Vetty Creations . ISBN 978 - 0 - 9757677 - 7 - 1 . ^ Catherine Amoroso Leslie ( 1 January 2007 ). Needlework Through History : An Encyclopedia . Greenwood Publishing Group . pp . 34 , 226 , 58 . ISBN 978 - 0 - 313 - 33548 - 8 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 . ^ " The History and Technique of Candlewicking and Whitework ". Needlepointers . com . 2020 - 10 - 27 . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ " Technique - Opus Anglicanum ". medieval . webcon . net . au . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ a b " Technique - Opus Teutonicum ". medieval . webcon . net . au . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ a b K , Roman ( 2012 - 08 - 07 ). " FolkCostume & Embroidery : Rushnyk embroidery of southern East Podillia ". FolkCostume & Embroidery . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ K , Roman ( 2014 - 07 - 01 ). " FolkCostume & Embroidery : Ukrainian Rose Embroidery ". FolkCostume & Embroidery . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ " UNESCO - Zmijanje embroidery ". ich . unesco . org . Retrieved 2022 - 04 - 16 . ^ " Needles ". Sarah ' s Hand Embroidery Tutorials . Retrieved 2020 - 05 - 06 . ^ van Niekerk 2006 . ^ Reader ' s Digest 1979 , pp . 112 – 115 . ^ " Materials Required for Hand Embroidery ". Sarah ' s Hand Embroidery Tutorials . Retrieved 2020 - 05 - 06 . ^ Reader ' s Digest 1979 , pp . 1 – 19 , 112 – 117 . ^ Willem . " Hand Embroidery Machine ". trc - leiden . nl . Retrieved 2019 - 02 - 19 . ^ Röllin , Peter . Stickerei - Zeit , Kultur und Kunst in St . Gallen 1870 – 1930 . VGS Verlagsgemeinschaft , St . Gallen 1989 , ISBN 3 - 7291 - 1052 - 7 ( in German ) ^ Schneider , Coleman ( 1968 ). Machine Made Embroideries . Globe Lithographing Company . ^ " Choosing Machine - Embroidery Threads ". Threads Magazine . The Taunton Press , Inc . 2008 - 11 - 02 . Retrieved 2018 - 11 - 27 . ^ Elin ( 2019 - 06 - 11 ). " History of embroidery and its rise in popularity ". Charles and Elin . Retrieved 2019 - 07 - 25 . ^ Synge , Lanto ( 2001 ). Art of Embroidery : History of Style and Technique . Woodbridge , England : Antique Collectors ' Club . p . 32 . ISBN 9781851493593 . ^ " Creative ". City & Guilds . ^ " A Little About Me ". Kathleen Laurel Sage . 15 February 2017 . ^ The Zen Cart ® Team ; et al . " Embroidered Soldered and Heat Zapped Surfaces by Kathleen Laurel Sage ". Bibliography [ edit ] Gillow , John ; Sentance , Bryan ( 1999 ). World Textiles . Bulfinch Press / Little , Brown . ISBN 0 - 8212 - 2621 - 5 . Levey , S . M .; King , D . ( 1993 ). The Victoria and Albert Museum ' s Textile Collection Vol . 3 : Embroidery in Britain from 1200 to 1750 . Victoria and Albert Museum . ISBN 1 - 85177 - 126 - 3 . Netherton , Robin ; Owen - Crocker , Gale R ., eds . ( 2005 ). Medieval Clothing and Textiles , Volume 1 . Boydell Press . ISBN 1 - 84383 - 123 - 6 . Complete Guide to Needlework . Reader ' s Digest . 1979 . ISBN 0 - 89577 - 059 - 8 . van Niekerk , Di ( 2006 ). A Perfect World in Ribbon Embroidery and Stumpwork . ISBN 1 - 84448 - 231 - 6 . Further reading [ edit ] Berman , Pat ( 2000 ). " Berlin Work ". American Needlepoint Guild . Archived from the original on 2009 - 02 - 06 . Retrieved 2009 - 01 - 24 . Caulfeild , S . F . A .; B . C . Saward ( 1885 ). The Dictionary of Needlework . Crummy , Andrew ( 2010 ). The Prestonpans Tapestry 1745 . Burke ' s Peerage & Gentry , for Battle of Prestonpans ( 1745 ) Heritage Trust . Embroiderers ' Guild Practical Study Group ( 1984 ). Needlework School . QED Publishers . ISBN 0 - 89009 - 785 - 2 . Koll , Juby Aleyas ( 2019 ). Sarah ' s Hand Embroidery Tutorials . Lemon , Jane ( 2004 ). Metal Thread Embroidery . Sterling . ISBN 0 - 7134 - 8926 - X . Vogelsang , Gillian ; Vogelsang , Willem , eds . ( 2015 ). TRC Needles . The TRC Digital Encyclopaedia of Decorative Needlework . Leiden , The Netherlands : Textile Research Centre . Wilson , David M . ( 1985 ). The Bayeux Tapestry . Thames and Hudson . ISBN 0 - 500 - 25122 - 3 . External links [ edit ] Media related to Embroidery at Wikimedia Commons Look up embroider in Wiktionary , the free dictionary . The History of Embroidery vteEmbroideryStyles Assisi Bargello Berlin work Blackwork Broderie anglaise Broderie perse Candlewicking Counted - thread Crewel Cross - stitch Cutwork Darning Drawn thread work Goldwork Hardanger Hedebo Machine Needlepoint Quillwork Smocking Stumpwork Surface Suzani Whitework Stitches Backstitch Blanket Box Buttonhole Chain stitch Couching and laid work Cross stitches Embroidery stitch Featherstitch Holbein Parisian Running Satin stitch Sashiko Shisha Straight stitch Tent stitch Tools and materials Aida cloth Embroidery hoop Embroidery thread Evenweave Perforated paper Plainweave Plastic canvas Sampler Slip Yarn Regionaland historical Art needlework Balochi Brazilian Bunka shishu Burmese Chikan Chinese Cantonese Sichuan Suzhou Xiang English Indian Islamic Jacobean Sashiko Kogin - zashi Bunka shishu Kaitag Kantha Kasuti Korean Macedonian Mountmellick Nakshi kantha Persian Rasht Sermeh Sistan Zardozi Opus Anglicanum Rushnyk Sewed muslin Ukrainian Vietnamese Vyshyvanka Embroideries Butler - Bowden Cope Bayeux Tapestry Bradford carpet Great Tapestry of Scotland Great Tapestry of Scotland : People ' s Panel Hastings Embroidery Hestia tapestry Magna Carta ( An Embroidery ) Margaret Layton ' s jacket New World Tapestry Overlord Embroidery Oxburgh Hangings Prestonpans Tapestry Quaker Tapestry Scottish Diaspora Tapestry Fragments of a Cope with the Seven Sacraments Designersand embroiderers Emilie Bach Leon Conrad Shahin Ebrahimzadeh - Pezeshki Kaffe Fassett Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty Constance Howard Marilyn Leavitt - Imblum François Lesage Ann Macbeth May Morris Jessie Newbery Mahtab Norouzi Tetiana Protcheva Charles Germain de Saint Aubin Mary Elizabeth Turner Dimitri Vlachos - Castano Kathleen Whyte Erica Wilson Lily Yeats Organizationsand museums Embroiderers ' Guild ( UK ) Embroiderers ' Guild of America Embroidery Software Protection Coalition Needlework Development Scheme Royal School of Needlework Wemyss School of Needlework Chung Young Yang Embroidery Museum Han Sang Soo Embroidery Museum Related Appliqué Crochet Knitting Lace Needlework Quilting vteSewingTechniques Basting Cut Darning Ease Embellishment Fabric tube turning Floating canvas Gather Godet Gusset Heirloom sewing Shirring Stitches List of sewing stitches Backstitch Bar tack Blanket Blind stitch Buttonhole Catch stitch Chain stitch Coverstitch Cross - stitch Embroidery stitch Hemstitch Lockstitch Overlock Pad stitch Pick stitch Rantering Running Sashiko Stoating Tack Topstitch Zigzag Seams Neckline Felled seam Seam allowance Style line NotionsTrim Bias tape Collar stay Elastic Galloon Grommet / Eyelet Interfacing Passementerie Piping Ruffle Rickrack Self - fabric Soutache Twill tape Wrights Closures Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Hook - and - eye Hook - and - loop fastener Shank Snap Zipper Materials Grain / Bias Selvage Textile / Fabric Thread Yarn Tools Bobbin Dress form Needlecase Needle threader Pattern notcher Pin Pincushion Pinking shears Scissors Seam ripper Sewing gauge Sewing needle Stitching awl Tailor ' s ham Tape measure Thimble Tracing paper Tracing wheel TradesSuppliers Cloth merchant Draper Dressmaker Haberdasher Mercer Sewing occupations Tailor Sewing machinemanufacturers List of brands and companies Barthélemy Thimonnier Bernina International Brother Industries Elias Howe Elna Feiyue Frister & Rossmann Janome Jones Sewing Machine Company Juki Merrow New Home Pfaff Sewmor Singer Tape edge machine Viking / Husqvarna White Pattern manufacturers Butterick Burda Clothkits McCall ' s Simplicity Media related to Sewing at Wikimedia Commons Clothing portal Glossary of terms vteDecorative arts and handicrafts History Textile Banner - making Canvas work Crocheting Cross - stitch Embroidery Felting Friendship bracelet Knitting Lace - making Lucet Macrame Millinery Needlepoint Needlework Patchwork Quilting Ribbon embroidery Rug hooking Rug making Sewing Shoemaking Spinning ( textiles ) String art Tapestry Tatting Tie - dye Weaving Paper Altered book Bookbinding Calligraphy Cardmaking Cast paper Collage Decoupage Papier collé Photomontage Iris folding Jianzhi Kamikiri Origami Kirigami Moneygami Embossing Marbling Papercraft Papercutting Chinese Jewish Slavic Papermaking Paper toys Papier - mâché Pop - up book Quilling Scrapbooking Stamping Wallpaper Wood Bentwood Cabinetry Carpentry Chip carving Ébéniste Fretwork Intarsia Marquetry Wood burning Wood carving Woodturning Ceramic Azulejo Bone china Earthenware Porcelain Pottery Stoneware Terracotta Glass Cameo glass Enamelled glass Glass etching Glassware Stained glass Chip work Metal Chemical milling Enamel Engraving Etching Jewellery Goldsmith Silversmith Bronze and brass ornamental work Ironwork Other Assemblage Balloon modelling Beadwork Bone carving Doll making Dollhouse Egg decorating Engraved gems Faux painting Grotesque Gargoyle Hardstone carving Lath art Lapidary Leatherworking Miniatures Micromosaic Mosaic Glass mosaic Ornament Pargeting Pietra dura Private press Pressed flower craft Qing handicrafts Scrimshaw Straw marquetry Wall decal Authority control National France BnF data Germany 2 Israel United States Japan Czech Republic Other IdRef Retrieved from " https :// en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Embroidery & oldid = 1148624983 " Categories : EmbroideryDecorative artsHidden categories : Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataDynamic listsCommons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 7 April 2023 , at 09 : 45 ( UTC ). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution - ShareAlike License 3 . 0 ; additional terms may apply . By using this site , you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia ® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation , Inc ., a non - profit organization . Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement