
BBC - History - Women's Work
            British Broadcasting CorporationHome   Accessibility links Skip to content Skip to local navigation Skip to bbc.co.uk navigation Skip to bbc.co.uk search Accessibility Help  


            This page has been archived and is no longer updated.
            
Find out more about page archiving.





History

Ancient History
British History
World Wars
Historic Figures
Family History
Hands on History
History for Kids
On This Day






Women's WorkBy Professor Pat Hudson
		Last updated 2011-03-29

Many women in Victorian Britain supported their families with wage-paying jobs alongside their already heavy domestic burdens. Discover how the earning power of women contributed to their independence both privately and publicly.

 




On this page
Families and households
The evidence of women's work
The varieties of women's work
Women and the family firm
Women's work, industrialisation and gender
A double burden
Find out more
Page options
Print this page


 


Families and households
Because of high birth rates and improving life expectancy, Victorian families were generally large. The growth of residential domestic service, even low down the social scale, and the prevalence of lodgers, especially in towns, meant that many households were further swollen in size and complex in formation. Although households consisting of more than two generations or containing more than one husband/wife partnership had never been common in Britain, there was a tendency, especially in textile districts, for grandparents to live in households containing young children, particularly where mothers were working outside the home.


 ...many households were dependent upon female earnings, especially those households run by widows. 


Many young people, especially young women, migrated to towns and cities in search of work as the possibilities of agricultural employment declined. Migration was facilitated by family and other connections: communities were recreated in towns and cities through local concentrations of settlement of particular ethnic, religious, regional or familial groups and by the possibility of finding accommodation through lodging or domestic service in the homes of contacts of this kind.
Most households necessarily drew income from a number of sources, with many women and juveniles adding to wage earning even if their employment was usually more intermittent and low-paid than that of adult males. Although the male breadwinner wage was increasingly regarded as the ideal and even the norm, in practice many households were dependent upon female earnings, especially those households run by widows.
As the mid-Victorian boom got underway the demand for female and juvenile labour expanded, particularly where new technologies or patterns of work were resented by skilled men. Cheap female and immigrant labour was often used to undercut male workers. Urbanisation created manifold opportunities for female employment despite the regulation of hours and conditions of work for women and juveniles in certain sectors, and the coming of compulsory education after 1871. Thus most women in Victorian society, in the two thirds of the population below the upper and middle classes, worked for wages. But in what occupations and how much? 
Top


The evidence of women's work


		Workers in a hat factory
		 ©

		One of the greatest problems facing the historian of women's work is the absence of reliable information. The census enumerators' books are the most obvious source, especially for the period after 1841 when occupations were included; but in practice such information is vastly more accurate for men than for women for several reasons. Firstly, contradictory and inconsistent instructions were given as to how to classify women's work, particularly where this involved home-working or consisted of helping in a family-run business (such work was sometimes deliberately excluded from the record). Furthermore, women's work was often part-time, casual, and not regarded as important enough to declare.


 Women may have also have preferred to keep their income-earning a secret from their husband. 


Sometimes it was illegal (as with prostitution) or performed in unregulated sweatshops (a further reason for failure to record). Women may have also have preferred to keep their income-earning a secret from their husband. An occupational designation, for whatever reason, meant something very different for men than for women. With the emphasis primarily upon their role as wives and mothers, women workers did not usually see their occupation as a centrally defining characteristic of their lives, and therefore frequently failed to declare it.
Business records can be used to supplement the census and to give an indication of the gender-specific nature of employment and wage earning in certain firms and regions. But the survival of wage books is generally poor and biased in favour of larger firms in the regulated sector - for example factory textile employment, where wages and employment levels were generally much higher than the norm. Trade directories are another useful source but suffer from the fact that they were published irregularly, and record not employment but the names of business proprietorships. Household budgets have recently been used for research on women's work. They have the advantage that they generally record all incomes, including poor relief and self-provisioning, allowing one to assess the contribution of women and juveniles to the family economy. Their disadvantage is that they have patchy survival over time and region, and they have varying levels of detail, accuracy and comparability because they were compiled for differing purposes.
Top


The varieties of women's work


		Working in the rag trade
		 ©

		What do we know from the difficult evidence about patterns of women's work over time and in different regions and sectors of the economy? The most obvious feature of women's work was its importance to most families, its variability across time and space and its persistent association with certain trades and sectors.
Female employment in the 1850s, 60s and 70s appears to have been higher than any recorded again until after World War II. Family budget evidence suggests that around 30-40 per cent of women from working class families contributed significantly to household incomes in the mid-Victorian years. This might have been even higher during the industrial revolution decades, before the rise of State and trade union policies regulating female labour and promoting the male breadwinner ideal.


 Domestic service of all kinds was the single largest employer of women ... 


As in earlier centuries, the bulk of waged work for women appears to have been found in trades associated with female skills or proclivities, particularly where these were also casual and low paid. Domestic service of all kinds was the single largest employer of women (40 per cent of female occupations stated in the census of 1851 in provincial cities and 50 per cent in London). The textile and clothing sectors came a close second. Women were also found in large numbers in metalwares and pottery and in a variety of petty trades, especially in towns: confectionery, brewing and other provisioning, seamstressing, laundry work, cleaning and retailing. Because many sectors which employed large numbers of women were concentrated in certain regions of the country (as with the cotton and woollen industries of south Lancashire and west Yorkshire), the statistics of female labour force participation varied across the country.
Top


Women and the family firm
Outside the working classes the traditional view of Victorian women is that they were little involved in business or enterprise and that their lives were largely devoted to the private sphere of domestic and family life. Certainly the cultural and evangelical ideals of the period placed women on a pedestal of moral probity, motherhood and domestic orderliness. There is some evidence that middle class women in some sectors of the economy did increasingly withdraw from direct involvement in family firms in the mid Victorian period, whilst the legal status of married women and their limited property rights made it difficult for them to operate in business on their own account at least before the 1880s.


 ...the stereotype of the middle-class woman as the angel in the house can easily be overplayed. 


However, the stereotype of the middle class woman as the angel in the house can easily be overplayed. Widows and spinsters were rarely in a position to rest on their laurels or be ladies of leisure. Many of the former carried on family businesses after the death of their husbands, whilst the significant surplus of spinsters in Victorian society found work as governesses or in trades which were regarded as suitable for women such as millinery and inn-keeping, grocery retailing and other victualling. Both widows and spinsters were prominent in property ownership and in financing businesses as sleeping partners. The typical firm in the 19th century was a small family partnership. Because of this many opportunities existed for wives and daughters to be closely involved. There is evidence of their important roles, especially behind the scenes: in retailing, book keeping, correspondence, dealing with clients, arranging deals.
Top


Women's work, industrialisation and gender


		Making hat boxes
		 ©

		The nature of industrialisation was much influenced by the prevalence of women's work and by the wider role of women in Victorian society. Women were prominent in many sectors which underwent considerable technological and organisational change partly because employers at first found it easier to recruit women and juveniles to new practices in the face of opposition from established, unionised or skilled adult male workers. Women provided a flexible, cheap and adaptive workforce for factories and sweatshops, and had feminine skills associated with some of the most rapidly expanding consumer goods industries at the forefront of industrialisation such as textiles, pottery, clothing and victualling. Some new technologies were adapted and modified with young female workers in mind, while the cheap labour of women and children could also hold back mechanisation in favour of traditional labour intensive methods.


 Women provided a flexible, cheap and adaptive workforce... 


Regional and sectoral variations in the extent to which women were involved in waged work had a major impact upon regional differences in gender relations within families and communities, and upon the complexion of local politics and trade unionism. Women's wage-earning ability often gave them more influence over wider familial and community decision making. This included decisions about consumption, and has been held partly responsible for the increasing independence and fashion consciousness of young women, and the rise in mass spending on household goods, clothing, furniture, curtains and foodstuffs. The more women worked for wages the less time they had to produce their own goods for the home.
Top


A double burden


		Victorian working women bore the brunt of household duties (Punch cartoon, 1894)
		 ©

		In areas where many women, including married women, worked full time for wages (for example in some of the cotton textile towns of the north west such as Preston) there may have developed greater sharing of housework between men and women, and a more prominent role for women in local politics. However, there are more examples where working women shouldered the double burden of waged work and the bulk of household responsibilities, and where their role in politics remained marginal.


 ...working women shouldered the double burden of waged work and the bulk of household responsibilities... 


As the 19th century progressed, there was a greater prevalence of gender-specific employment which was often used to enhance control and discipline in the workplace. Supervisory roles were almost exclusively taken by men, and men also came to operate the most expensive and sophisticated machinery and to monopolise the high status and higher paid jobs even in textiles. The expansion of heavy industries such as iron, steel, mining, engineering and ship building in the later century also created sectors which employed almost exclusively male labour, which were associated solely with male attributes and which endorsed the male breadwinner ideal. Thus a hardening of gender assumptions in the nineteenth century was closely associated with corresponding changes in the workplace.
Top


Find out more
Books
Women's History in Britain, 1850-1945 ed. June Purvis (London UCL Press 1995) A collection of essays covering a range of topics from women's work and the family to education, health, sexuality and politics.
Women, Gender and Industrialisation in England, 1700-1870 by Katrina Honeyman (Basingstoke Macmillan, 2000) A concise volume good on gender, class and industrialisation.
The First Industrial Woman by Deborah Valenze (Oxford OUP, 1995) Good on the implications of shifting employment patterns, agricultural work and domestic service.
A History of European Women's Work, 1700 to the present by Deborah Simonton, (New York Routledge, 1998) Good for the longer time perspective and for European similarities and contrasts.
Links
The Womens' Library An organisation of historians of women in Britain promoting research and writing on women's history. This website also contains a number of very useful links to other websites associated with the history of women.
Spartacus Schoolnet A website directed at schools containing biographies of key women in the history of the British women's movement.
Places to visit
There a several museums which help to recapture the nature of Victorian society and the place of women within it, most obviously the Victoria and Albert Museum in London which has wonderful collections of art and artefacts reflecting the nature of the middle- and upper-class Victorian home. Smaller museums yield information and evidence of women's work and their patterns of dress and consumption. Most notably Quarry Bank Mill at Style, Cheshire; the textile museum in the Halifax Piece Hall; and Platt Hall Museum, Manchester.
The new industrial and commercial middle classes of the Victorian era were great patrons of the arts, and some British provincial art galleries contain major collections of the sorts of works which they commissioned as well as work depicting domestic interiors and women. Amongst the best of these art galleries are the Birmingham City Art Gallery and the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool.
Consult some primary sources detailing the nature of women's work and household activities such as business records, census enumerators' books, trade directories, household budgets and private diaries. Details of business records relating to women in the West Yorkshire textile industries can be found in The West Riding Wool Textile Industry: a catalogue of business records by Pat Hudson, (Edington, Pasold, 1976). Other guides to archive holdings can be found on the websites of most major repositories. Many collections of working class autobiographies have been published and include several written by women. For a guide see for example, The Autobiography of the Working Class: an annotated critical bibliography vols 1-3 ed. by J. Burnett, D. Vincent and J. Mayall, (Hassocks Harvester 1984, 1987, 1989).
Examining surviving Victorian housing from outside and from within can be very revealing particularly if these can be matched to information from Census returns. It is possible to reconstruct Victorian households at each census point and to imagine where each household member resided within the house. In many major cities there are now organised walks which are helpful in tracing Victorian history and women's history trails. Details of these can usually be obtained from local history libraries.
Top


About the author
Pat Hudson is Professor of History in the School of History and Archaeology at Cardiff University. She specialises in the impact of economic and social change within different local and regional, economic, social and cultural settings. Her books include The Industrial Revolution (London, 1992).
Top

 






«;
More Victorians







British History Timeline




Explore the British History Timeline from the Neolithic to the present day
 

 



World War One Centenary




Find out more about how the BBC is covering the World War One Centenary, and see the 

latest programmes and online content
 

 



Surviving the trenches




Dan Snow asks why so many soldiers survived the trenches in WW1
 

 




The History of the Home




Take a journey through the history of the home. Each room tells a different story. 
 

 



 


     BBC iD      BBC iD            Settings     Sign out         Search term:   BBC navigation News Sport Weather  iPlayer  TV Radio More…     CBBC CBeebies Comedy Food History Learning Music Science Nature Local Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Full A-Z of BBC sites       BBC links  Mobile site Terms of Use About the BBC   Privacy Accessibility Help   Cookies Contact the BBC   Parental Guidance    BBC © 2014 The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more. This page is best viewed in an up-to-date web browser with style sheets (CSS) enabled. While you will be able to view the content of this page in your current browser, you will not be able to get the full visual experience. Please consider upgrading your browser software or enabling style sheets (CSS) if you are able to do so.    




BBC - History - Women ' s Work British Broadcasting CorporationHome Accessibility links Skip to content Skip to local navigation Skip to bbc . co . uk navigation Skip to bbc . co . uk search Accessibility Help This page has been archived and is no longer updated . Find out more about page archiving . History Ancient History British History World Wars Historic Figures Family History Hands on History History for Kids On This Day Women ' s WorkBy Professor Pat Hudson Last updated 2011 - 03 - 29 Many women in Victorian Britain supported their families with wage - paying jobs alongside their already heavy domestic burdens . Discover how the earning power of women contributed to their independence both privately and publicly . On this page Families and households The evidence of women ' s work The varieties of women ' s work Women and the family firm Women ' s work , industrialisation and gender A double burden Find out more Page options Print this page Families and households Because of high birth rates and improving life expectancy , Victorian families were generally large . The growth of residential domestic service , even low down the social scale , and the prevalence of lodgers , especially in towns , meant that many households were further swollen in size and complex in formation . Although households consisting of more than two generations or containing more than one husband / wife partnership had never been common in Britain , there was a tendency , especially in textile districts , for grandparents to live in households containing young children , particularly where mothers were working outside the home . ... many households were dependent upon female earnings , especially those households run by widows . Many young people , especially young women , migrated to towns and cities in search of work as the possibilities of agricultural employment declined . Migration was facilitated by family and other connections : communities were recreated in towns and cities through local concentrations of settlement of particular ethnic , religious , regional or familial groups and by the possibility of finding accommodation through lodging or domestic service in the homes of contacts of this kind . Most households necessarily drew income from a number of sources , with many women and juveniles adding to wage earning even if their employment was usually more intermittent and low - paid than that of adult males . Although the male breadwinner wage was increasingly regarded as the ideal and even the norm , in practice many households were dependent upon female earnings , especially those households run by widows . As the mid - Victorian boom got underway the demand for female and juvenile labour expanded , particularly where new technologies or patterns of work were resented by skilled men . Cheap female and immigrant labour was often used to undercut male workers . Urbanisation created manifold opportunities for female employment despite the regulation of hours and conditions of work for women and juveniles in certain sectors , and the coming of compulsory education after 1871 . Thus most women in Victorian society , in the two thirds of the population below the upper and middle classes , worked for wages . But in what occupations and how much ? Top The evidence of women ' s work Workers in a hat factory © One of the greatest problems facing the historian of women ' s work is the absence of reliable information . The census enumerators ' books are the most obvious source , especially for the period after 1841 when occupations were included ; but in practice such information is vastly more accurate for men than for women for several reasons . Firstly , contradictory and inconsistent instructions were given as to how to classify women ' s work , particularly where this involved home - working or consisted of helping in a family - run business ( such work was sometimes deliberately excluded from the record ). Furthermore , women ' s work was often part - time , casual , and not regarded as important enough to declare . Women may have also have preferred to keep their income - earning a secret from their husband . Sometimes it was illegal ( as with prostitution ) or performed in unregulated sweatshops ( a further reason for failure to record ). Women may have also have preferred to keep their income - earning a secret from their husband . An occupational designation , for whatever reason , meant something very different for men than for women . With the emphasis primarily upon their role as wives and mothers , women workers did not usually see their occupation as a centrally defining characteristic of their lives , and therefore frequently failed to declare it . Business records can be used to supplement the census and to give an indication of the gender - specific nature of employment and wage earning in certain firms and regions . But the survival of wage books is generally poor and biased in favour of larger firms in the regulated sector - for example factory textile employment , where wages and employment levels were generally much higher than the norm . Trade directories are another useful source but suffer from the fact that they were published irregularly , and record not employment but the names of business proprietorships . Household budgets have recently been used for research on women ' s work . They have the advantage that they generally record all incomes , including poor relief and self - provisioning , allowing one to assess the contribution of women and juveniles to the family economy . Their disadvantage is that they have patchy survival over time and region , and they have varying levels of detail , accuracy and comparability because they were compiled for differing purposes . Top The varieties of women ' s work Working in the rag trade © What do we know from the difficult evidence about patterns of women ' s work over time and in different regions and sectors of the economy ? The most obvious feature of women ' s work was its importance to most families , its variability across time and space and its persistent association with certain trades and sectors . Female employment in the 1850s , 60s and 70s appears to have been higher than any recorded again until after World War II . Family budget evidence suggests that around 30 - 40 per cent of women from working class families contributed significantly to household incomes in the mid - Victorian years . This might have been even higher during the industrial revolution decades , before the rise of State and trade union policies regulating female labour and promoting the male breadwinner ideal . Domestic service of all kinds was the single largest employer of women ... As in earlier centuries , the bulk of waged work for women appears to have been found in trades associated with female skills or proclivities , particularly where these were also casual and low paid . Domestic service of all kinds was the single largest employer of women ( 40 per cent of female occupations stated in the census of 1851 in provincial cities and 50 per cent in London ). The textile and clothing sectors came a close second . Women were also found in large numbers in metalwares and pottery and in a variety of petty trades , especially in towns : confectionery , brewing and other provisioning , seamstressing , laundry work , cleaning and retailing . Because many sectors which employed large numbers of women were concentrated in certain regions of the country ( as with the cotton and woollen industries of south Lancashire and west Yorkshire ), the statistics of female labour force participation varied across the country . Top Women and the family firm Outside the working classes the traditional view of Victorian women is that they were little involved in business or enterprise and that their lives were largely devoted to the private sphere of domestic and family life . Certainly the cultural and evangelical ideals of the period placed women on a pedestal of moral probity , motherhood and domestic orderliness . There is some evidence that middle class women in some sectors of the economy did increasingly withdraw from direct involvement in family firms in the mid Victorian period , whilst the legal status of married women and their limited property rights made it difficult for them to operate in business on their own account at least before the 1880s . ... the stereotype of the middle - class woman as the angel in the house can easily be overplayed . However , the stereotype of the middle class woman as the angel in the house can easily be overplayed . Widows and spinsters were rarely in a position to rest on their laurels or be ladies of leisure . Many of the former carried on family businesses after the death of their husbands , whilst the significant surplus of spinsters in Victorian society found work as governesses or in trades which were regarded as suitable for women such as millinery and inn - keeping , grocery retailing and other victualling . Both widows and spinsters were prominent in property ownership and in financing businesses as sleeping partners . The typical firm in the 19th century was a small family partnership . Because of this many opportunities existed for wives and daughters to be closely involved . There is evidence of their important roles , especially behind the scenes : in retailing , book keeping , correspondence , dealing with clients , arranging deals . Top Women ' s work , industrialisation and gender Making hat boxes © The nature of industrialisation was much influenced by the prevalence of women ' s work and by the wider role of women in Victorian society . Women were prominent in many sectors which underwent considerable technological and organisational change partly because employers at first found it easier to recruit women and juveniles to new practices in the face of opposition from established , unionised or skilled adult male workers . Women provided a flexible , cheap and adaptive workforce for factories and sweatshops , and had feminine skills associated with some of the most rapidly expanding consumer goods industries at the forefront of industrialisation such as textiles , pottery , clothing and victualling . Some new technologies were adapted and modified with young female workers in mind , while the cheap labour of women and children could also hold back mechanisation in favour of traditional labour intensive methods . Women provided a flexible , cheap and adaptive workforce ... Regional and sectoral variations in the extent to which women were involved in waged work had a major impact upon regional differences in gender relations within families and communities , and upon the complexion of local politics and trade unionism . Women ' s wage - earning ability often gave them more influence over wider familial and community decision making . This included decisions about consumption , and has been held partly responsible for the increasing independence and fashion consciousness of young women , and the rise in mass spending on household goods , clothing , furniture , curtains and foodstuffs . The more women worked for wages the less time they had to produce their own goods for the home . Top A double burden Victorian working women bore the brunt of household duties ( Punch cartoon , 1894 ) © In areas where many women , including married women , worked full time for wages ( for example in some of the cotton textile towns of the north west such as Preston ) there may have developed greater sharing of housework between men and women , and a more prominent role for women in local politics . However , there are more examples where working women shouldered the double burden of waged work and the bulk of household responsibilities , and where their role in politics remained marginal . ... working women shouldered the double burden of waged work and the bulk of household responsibilities ... As the 19th century progressed , there was a greater prevalence of gender - specific employment which was often used to enhance control and discipline in the workplace . Supervisory roles were almost exclusively taken by men , and men also came to operate the most expensive and sophisticated machinery and to monopolise the high status and higher paid jobs even in textiles . The expansion of heavy industries such as iron , steel , mining , engineering and ship building in the later century also created sectors which employed almost exclusively male labour , which were associated solely with male attributes and which endorsed the male breadwinner ideal . Thus a hardening of gender assumptions in the nineteenth century was closely associated with corresponding changes in the workplace . Top Find out more Books Women ' s History in Britain , 1850 - 1945 ed . June Purvis ( London UCL Press 1995 ) A collection of essays covering a range of topics from women ' s work and the family to education , health , sexuality and politics . Women , Gender and Industrialisation in England , 1700 - 1870 by Katrina Honeyman ( Basingstoke Macmillan , 2000 ) A concise volume good on gender , class and industrialisation . The First Industrial Woman by Deborah Valenze ( Oxford OUP , 1995 ) Good on the implications of shifting employment patterns , agricultural work and domestic service . A History of European Women ' s Work , 1700 to the present by Deborah Simonton , ( New York Routledge , 1998 ) Good for the longer time perspective and for European similarities and contrasts . Links The Womens ' Library An organisation of historians of women in Britain promoting research and writing on women ' s history . This website also contains a number of very useful links to other websites associated with the history of women . Spartacus Schoolnet A website directed at schools containing biographies of key women in the history of the British women ' s movement . Places to visit There a several museums which help to recapture the nature of Victorian society and the place of women within it , most obviously the Victoria and Albert Museum in London which has wonderful collections of art and artefacts reflecting the nature of the middle - and upper - class Victorian home . Smaller museums yield information and evidence of women ' s work and their patterns of dress and consumption . Most notably Quarry Bank Mill at Style , Cheshire ; the textile museum in the Halifax Piece Hall ; and Platt Hall Museum , Manchester . The new industrial and commercial middle classes of the Victorian era were great patrons of the arts , and some British provincial art galleries contain major collections of the sorts of works which they commissioned as well as work depicting domestic interiors and women . Amongst the best of these art galleries are the Birmingham City Art Gallery and the Walker Art Gallery , Liverpool . Consult some primary sources detailing the nature of women ' s work and household activities such as business records , census enumerators ' books , trade directories , household budgets and private diaries . Details of business records relating to women in the West Yorkshire textile industries can be found in The West Riding Wool Textile Industry : a catalogue of business records by Pat Hudson , ( Edington , Pasold , 1976 ). Other guides to archive holdings can be found on the websites of most major repositories . Many collections of working class autobiographies have been published and include several written by women . For a guide see for example , The Autobiography of the Working Class : an annotated critical bibliography vols 1 - 3 ed . by J . Burnett , D . Vincent and J . Mayall , ( Hassocks Harvester 1984 , 1987 , 1989 ). Examining surviving Victorian housing from outside and from within can be very revealing particularly if these can be matched to information from Census returns . It is possible to reconstruct Victorian households at each census point and to imagine where each household member resided within the house . In many major cities there are now organised walks which are helpful in tracing Victorian history and women ' s history trails . Details of these can usually be obtained from local history libraries . Top About the author Pat Hudson is Professor of History in the School of History and Archaeology at Cardiff University . She specialises in the impact of economic and social change within different local and regional , economic , social and cultural settings . Her books include The Industrial Revolution ( London , 1992 ). Top «; More Victorians British History Timeline Explore the British History Timeline from the Neolithic to the present day World War One Centenary Find out more about how the BBC is covering the World War One Centenary , and see the latest programmes and online content Surviving the trenches Dan Snow asks why so many soldiers survived the trenches in WW1 The History of the Home Take a journey through the history of the home . Each room tells a different story . BBC iD BBC iD Settings Sign out Search term : BBC navigation News Sport Weather iPlayer TV Radio More … CBBC CBeebies Comedy Food History Learning Music Science Nature Local Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Full A - Z of BBC sites BBC links Mobile site Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Accessibility Help Cookies Contact the BBC Parental Guidance BBC © 2014 The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites . Read more . This page is best viewed in an up - to - date web browser with style sheets ( CSS ) enabled . While you will be able to view the content of this page in your current browser , you will not be able to get the full visual experience . Please consider upgrading your browser software or enabling style sheets ( CSS ) if you are able to do so .