




Grayson Perry: spinning a yarn 










 


 


 

















 


 










































































  















 

The Telegraph logo 
 






    News    
    Sport    
    Business    
    Opinion    
    Ukraine    
    Money    
    Life    
    Style    
    Travel    
    Culture    
    Puzzles    





 

Search Icon 
 

    Subscribe now   Free for one month  
 
 



									Log in
								

   










Sections


  News
 
 

  News home  
  Royals  
  UK news  
  Politics  
  World  
  Health  
  Defence  
  Science  
  Education  
  Environment  
  Investigations  
  Global Health Security  
 
  Sport
 
 

  Sport home  
  Football  
  Rugby Union  
  Cricket  
  F1  
  Women's Sport  
  Tennis  
  Golf  
  Racing  
  Boxing  
  Cycling  
  More...  
 
  Business
 
 

  Business home  
  Alex  
  Economy  
  Companies  
  Markets  
  Tech  
 
  Opinion
 
 

  Opinion home  
  Obituaries  
  Letters to the Editor  
  Telegraph View  
  Our columnists  
  Cartoons  
   
 
  Ukraine
 
 

  Ukraine home  
  Daily podcast  
  Daily newsletter  
 
  Money
 
 

  Money home  
  Investing  
  Property  
  Pensions  
  Banking  
  Tax  
  Insurance  
  Bills and utilities  
  Financial Solutions  
  More...  
 
  Life
 
 

  Life home  
  Family  
  Columnists  
  Cookbook  
  Food & Drink  
  Health & Fitness  
  Tel Mag  
  Cars  
  Puzzle News  
  Gardening  
  Recommended  
 
  Style
 
 

  Style home  
  Fashion  
  Beauty  
  Luxury  
  Interiors  
  Weddings  
 
  Travel
 
 

  Travel home  
  UK holidays  
  Dream Trips  
  Destinations  
  City guides  
  Hotels  
  Cruises  
  Rail  
  Adventure  
  Luxury  
  Ask the experts  
   
 
  Culture
 
 

  Culture home  
  TV  
  Film  
  Music  
  Books  
  Theatre  
  Opera  
  Art  
  Gaming  
  Hit lists  
  Telegraph Tickets  
  More...  
 
  Puzzles  


  

   Subscribe now   Free for one month 
 
 



  Log in

Login icon 
 


 Follow us on:

 

Facebook icon 
  
 

Instagram icon 
  
 

Twitter icon 
  
 

Snapchat icon 
  
 

LinkedIn icon 
  
 

YouTube icon  
  





More from The Telegraph


  Download our app  
  Newsletters  
  Telegraph Extra  
  Wine Cellar  
  Recommended  
  Financial Solutions  
  Events  
  Betting  
  Dating  
  Offers  
  Broadband and Mobile Deals  
  Shop  
  Garden shop  
  Bookshop  
  Tickets  
  Puzzles  
  Fantasy Football  
  Work at The Telegraph  
  Telegraph Corporate  
  Help and support  
  Voucher codes 
  See top shops
 
 

  Samsung  
  Nike  
  ASOS  
  eBay  
  Currys  
  Wayfair  
  TUI  
  JD Sports  
  Travelodge  
  Adidas  

 








Jump to navigation


 
 


  


Grayson Perry: spinning a yarn



   Annabel Freyberg    01 November 2008 • 12:01am 

 






 





 
  
 

 Grayson Perry, dressed as Claire, his female alter ego, beside his needlepoint Vote Alan Measles for God.


 




 A show of tapestries by 14 artists making their textile debut is drawing attention to this ancient medium. Annabel Freyberg talks to Grayson Perry, who has designed one of the most provocative. Photograph by Beth Evans  




 'God and cuddly toys have a lot in common,' Grayson Perry opines. 'Both are imaginary characters we project our feelings on to.' Perry is talking about the alarming creature at the centre of his latest work, an 8.2ft-tall tapestry-cum-campaign banner. This is not God, but a red and raging Alan Measles, his childhood teddy (named after Alan, the boy who lived next door, and the measles Perry endured), who has appeared in a number of guises on Perry's more usual pots. Grimacing and far from cuddly, Measles wears a suicide bomber's belt, holds aloft a crudely stylised Kalashnikov and balances on the Twin Towers. 'Vote Alan Measles for God' reads the line above the 'poster' (edged in fetching red, white and blue bullets). 'He Will Save Us' avers the line at the bottom.




What is Perry up to? The work is graphically attractive, but a close inspection reveals a cache of nightmare images: bodybags, exploding planes, tanks, knives, coffins, a hooded figure Abu Ghraib-style, Osama bin Laden and other ghoulish objects associated with the War on Terror, all drawn in a cartoon style. It is like looking at the Hell section in a modern-day Garden of Earthly Delights. In fact, it is Perry's homage to a genre of carpets woven in Afghanistan since its invasion by Russia in 1979, which incorporate tanks and bombs alongside more traditional geometric motifs. Perry has been collecting these for some time. 'They're soldiers' souvenirs,' he explains. 'I lifted imagery from them and drew it in the same style - a Stanley knife, the bullets round the edge. It's a folk artefact for the age of 24-hour news; a clash between something made by hand in an age-old technique and our computer culture; a bringing together of something geographically and culturally specific and global events.'




He was mulling over what to do with this subject matter when Christopher and Suzanne Sharp asked him to design a tapestry two and a half years ago. The couple, who own and run the Rug Company, have commissioned dozens of carpets from fashion and interior designers in the past decade and wanted to get artists on board, too. They felt that tapestry might be a better medium than hand-knotted rugs, its fine weave allowing for more detail. They approached 16 artists from around the world, giving them free rein in terms of size, style and subject matter. 'We wanted the project to be really international, and we wanted people who had some connection with thread in their work,' Chris explains.




Thus alongside British favourites such as Perry, Gavin Turk, Gary Hume and Peter Blake are less familiar names such as Shahzia Sikander (Pakistani-raised and New York-based), Brazilian Beatriz Milhazes, Americans Kara Walker and Fred Tomaselli, and Egyptian-born Ghada Amer (who embroiders her paintings) in collaboration with the Iranian artist Reza Farkhondeh. Of the 16-strong wishlist, 14 responded positively, and a show of their incredibly different tapestries opens in 10 days time at the massive (70,000sq ft) old Express Dairies in Bloomsbury. There is an edition of five of each tapestry, costing from £15,000, with Perry's from £30,000; a number have already been sold.




'They're made in the same way as Renaissance tapestries,' Chris says. 'Totally handmade. You do a full-scale drawing on graph paper, then number and colour match each section. Even the bobbins are numbered - it's a bit like painting by numbers.' Though most of the Rug Company's work is produced in Nepal, for this project he sel­ected a weaving house in China, which makes its copies of fine-weave French Aubussons. 'Because most of the artists had never done a tapestry before, we used lots of sampling,' Chris explains. One difference from the past is synthetic rather than vegetable hues, which allow a greater variety of colours and do not fade. The hardest piece to make, and the largest (14.7x15ft) was Paul Noble's monochrome drawing of a fantastical city based on an existing work. It required 40 shades of grey and took more than a year on the loom.




Grayson Perry, with his passionate interest in craft, was the one artist who decided to work in needlepoint - a coarser medium where the stitches are more noticeable. Chris remembers him saying, 'If it comes back different from the drawing then I'm happy.'




'I wanted it to look a bit ethnic,' Perry says, 'and to look as if it was designed as a tapestry rather than as a photograph that had been transposed. But in the end, what I want with everything I do is for it to look good.' He drew his tapestry by hand, half-scale, then scanned it into a computer to work on the colours. It took four or five months to weave.




One of Alan Measles' most striking attributes is the bunch-of-grapes-like shapes in his arms and legs. 'That's testosterone running through his veins - the fruits are grenades,' Perry explains. 'The whole macho thing. It's testosterone that fuels the world's problems. It relates to a dress I made many years ago with Alan Measles as an avenging angel on it. The war he wages is against bad parenting, which is the trigger for people taking their anger out on the world. Look at any dictator - Saddam Hussein was no exception - and you'll find that childhood trauma is at the root of it.'




Talk of a revival in tapestries may be premature but the medium is certainly in the spotlight once more. This autumn the leading British tapestry weavers Dovecot Studios moved into their new £8 million Edinburgh home, the old Victoria baths, while Thomas Campbell, the incoming English-born director of the Metropolitan Museum in New York, is a tapestry expert. The tapestries in this show are to be exhibited at Design Miami in December, and all manner of claims look likely to be made for them. Perry has already embarked on a new one, and as he so practically puts it, 'The best thing about a tapestry is that you can roll it up and put it in the car.'





Demon, Yarns & Tales, November 10-22, The Dairy, 7 Wakefield Street, London WC1 (020-7243 7345; bannersofpersuasion.com) 









 

Twitter Icon 
  
 

Facebook Icon 
  
 

WhatsApp Icon 
  
 

Email Icon 
  

 

Comment speech bubble 
  








        Advertisement
       

 
More stories










 

Twitter Icon 
  
 

Facebook Icon 
  
 

WhatsApp Icon 
  
 

Email Icon 
  

 

Comment speech bubble 
  







 
More from The Telegraph







More stories









Pentagon leaks: Jack Teixeira faces 15 years in jail over worst intelligence breach in decade








By
Rozina Sabur



14 Apr 2023, 9:02pm























Why is the Left in the driving seat of government after 13 years of Tory rule?















Charles Moore









14 Apr 2023, 9:00pm































Parents’ fury as children told a sex change can stop bullying








By
Benedict Smith



14 Apr 2023, 8:56pm























Grand National 2023 sweepstake kit: Printable download for the big race








By
Telegraph Sport



14 Apr 2023, 8:49pm























Grand National 2023 tips: Latest odds, horses to watch plus expert and celebrity picks








By
Tom Ward



14 Apr 2023, 8:49pm























Grand National 2023 runners and riders confirmed list: A horse-by-horse guide








By
Marcus Armytage



14 Apr 2023, 8:48pm


























 

The Telegraph 
 

  Back to top
 
 

 Follow us on:

 

Facebook icon 
  
 

Instagram icon 
  
 

Twitter icon 
  
 

Snapchat icon 
  
 

LinkedIn icon 
  
 

YouTube icon  
  








 Help Centre 
 About us 
 Telegraph Extra 
 Reader Prints 
 Branded Content 
 Syndication and Commissioning 
 Guidelines 
 Privacy 
 Terms and Conditions 
 Advertising Terms 
 Fantasy Sport 
 UK Voucher Codes 
 Betting Offers 
 Modern Slavery 
 Tax Strategy 
 Broadband and Mobile Deals 
 Wine Cellar 
  
  


       © Telegraph Media Group Limited 2023
      







Grayson Perry : spinning a yarn The Telegraph logo News Sport Business Opinion Ukraine Money Life Style Travel Culture Puzzles Search Icon Subscribe now Free for one month Log in Sections News News home Royals UK news Politics World Health Defence Science Education Environment Investigations Global Health Security Sport Sport home Football Rugby Union Cricket F1 Women ' s Sport Tennis Golf Racing Boxing Cycling More ... Business Business home Alex Economy Companies Markets Tech Opinion Opinion home Obituaries Letters to the Editor Telegraph View Our columnists Cartoons Ukraine Ukraine home Daily podcast Daily newsletter Money Money home Investing Property Pensions Banking Tax Insurance Bills and utilities Financial Solutions More ... Life Life home Family Columnists Cookbook Food & Drink Health & Fitness Tel Mag Cars Puzzle News Gardening Recommended Style Style home Fashion Beauty Luxury Interiors Weddings Travel Travel home UK holidays Dream Trips Destinations City guides Hotels Cruises Rail Adventure Luxury Ask the experts Culture Culture home TV Film Music Books Theatre Opera Art Gaming Hit lists Telegraph Tickets More ... Puzzles Subscribe now Free for one month Log in Login icon Follow us on : Facebook icon Instagram icon Twitter icon Snapchat icon LinkedIn icon YouTube icon More from The Telegraph Download our app Newsletters Telegraph Extra Wine Cellar Recommended Financial Solutions Events Betting Dating Offers Broadband and Mobile Deals Shop Garden shop Bookshop Tickets Puzzles Fantasy Football Work at The Telegraph Telegraph Corporate Help and support Voucher codes See top shops Samsung Nike ASOS eBay Currys Wayfair TUI JD Sports Travelodge Adidas Jump to navigation Grayson Perry : spinning a yarn Annabel Freyberg 01 November 2008 • 12 : 01am Grayson Perry , dressed as Claire , his female alter ego , beside his needlepoint Vote Alan Measles for God . A show of tapestries by 14 artists making their textile debut is drawing attention to this ancient medium . Annabel Freyberg talks to Grayson Perry , who has designed one of the most provocative . Photograph by Beth Evans ' God and cuddly toys have a lot in common ,' Grayson Perry opines . ' Both are imaginary characters we project our feelings on to .' Perry is talking about the alarming creature at the centre of his latest work , an 8 . 2ft - tall tapestry - cum - campaign banner . This is not God , but a red and raging Alan Measles , his childhood teddy ( named after Alan , the boy who lived next door , and the measles Perry endured ), who has appeared in a number of guises on Perry ' s more usual pots . Grimacing and far from cuddly , Measles wears a suicide bomber ' s belt , holds aloft a crudely stylised Kalashnikov and balances on the Twin Towers . ' Vote Alan Measles for God ' reads the line above the ' poster ' ( edged in fetching red , white and blue bullets ). ' He Will Save Us ' avers the line at the bottom . What is Perry up to ? The work is graphically attractive , but a close inspection reveals a cache of nightmare images : bodybags , exploding planes , tanks , knives , coffins , a hooded figure Abu Ghraib - style , Osama bin Laden and other ghoulish objects associated with the War on Terror , all drawn in a cartoon style . It is like looking at the Hell section in a modern - day Garden of Earthly Delights . In fact , it is Perry ' s homage to a genre of carpets woven in Afghanistan since its invasion by Russia in 1979 , which incorporate tanks and bombs alongside more traditional geometric motifs . Perry has been collecting these for some time . ' They ' re soldiers ' souvenirs ,' he explains . ' I lifted imagery from them and drew it in the same style - a Stanley knife , the bullets round the edge . It ' s a folk artefact for the age of 24 - hour news ; a clash between something made by hand in an age - old technique and our computer culture ; a bringing together of something geographically and culturally specific and global events .' He was mulling over what to do with this subject matter when Christopher and Suzanne Sharp asked him to design a tapestry two and a half years ago . The couple , who own and run the Rug Company , have commissioned dozens of carpets from fashion and interior designers in the past decade and wanted to get artists on board , too . They felt that tapestry might be a better medium than hand - knotted rugs , its fine weave allowing for more detail . They approached 16 artists from around the world , giving them free rein in terms of size , style and subject matter . ' We wanted the project to be really international , and we wanted people who had some connection with thread in their work ,' Chris explains . Thus alongside British favourites such as Perry , Gavin Turk , Gary Hume and Peter Blake are less familiar names such as Shahzia Sikander ( Pakistani - raised and New York - based ), Brazilian Beatriz Milhazes , Americans Kara Walker and Fred Tomaselli , and Egyptian - born Ghada Amer ( who embroiders her paintings ) in collaboration with the Iranian artist Reza Farkhondeh . Of the 16 - strong wishlist , 14 responded positively , and a show of their incredibly different tapestries opens in 10 days time at the massive ( 70 , 000sq ft ) old Express Dairies in Bloomsbury . There is an edition of five of each tapestry , costing from £ 15 , 000 , with Perry ' s from £ 30 , 000 ; a number have already been sold . ' They ' re made in the same way as Renaissance tapestries ,' Chris says . ' Totally handmade . You do a full - scale drawing on graph paper , then number and colour match each section . Even the bobbins are numbered - it ' s a bit like painting by numbers .' Though most of the Rug Company ' s work is produced in Nepal , for this project he sel ­ ected a weaving house in China , which makes its copies of fine - weave French Aubussons . ' Because most of the artists had never done a tapestry before , we used lots of sampling ,' Chris explains . One difference from the past is synthetic rather than vegetable hues , which allow a greater variety of colours and do not fade . The hardest piece to make , and the largest ( 14 . 7x15ft ) was Paul Noble ' s monochrome drawing of a fantastical city based on an existing work . It required 40 shades of grey and took more than a year on the loom . Grayson Perry , with his passionate interest in craft , was the one artist who decided to work in needlepoint - a coarser medium where the stitches are more noticeable . Chris remembers him saying , ' If it comes back different from the drawing then I ' m happy .' ' I wanted it to look a bit ethnic ,' Perry says , ' and to look as if it was designed as a tapestry rather than as a photograph that had been transposed . But in the end , what I want with everything I do is for it to look good .' He drew his tapestry by hand , half - scale , then scanned it into a computer to work on the colours . It took four or five months to weave . One of Alan Measles ' most striking attributes is the bunch - of - grapes - like shapes in his arms and legs . ' That ' s testosterone running through his veins - the fruits are grenades ,' Perry explains . ' The whole macho thing . It ' s testosterone that fuels the world ' s problems . It relates to a dress I made many years ago with Alan Measles as an avenging angel on it . The war he wages is against bad parenting , which is the trigger for people taking their anger out on the world . Look at any dictator - Saddam Hussein was no exception - and you ' ll find that childhood trauma is at the root of it .' Talk of a revival in tapestries may be premature but the medium is certainly in the spotlight once more . This autumn the leading British tapestry weavers Dovecot Studios moved into their new £ 8 million Edinburgh home , the old Victoria baths , while Thomas Campbell , the incoming English - born director of the Metropolitan Museum in New York , is a tapestry expert . The tapestries in this show are to be exhibited at Design Miami in December , and all manner of claims look likely to be made for them . Perry has already embarked on a new one , and as he so practically puts it , ' The best thing about a tapestry is that you can roll it up and put it in the car .' Demon , Yarns & Tales , November 10 - 22 , The Dairy , 7 Wakefield Street , London WC1 ( 020 - 7243 7345 ; bannersofpersuasion . com ) Twitter Icon Facebook Icon WhatsApp Icon Email Icon Comment speech bubble Advertisement More stories Twitter Icon Facebook Icon WhatsApp Icon Email Icon Comment speech bubble More from The Telegraph More stories Pentagon leaks : Jack Teixeira faces 15 years in jail over worst intelligence breach in decade By Rozina Sabur 14 Apr 2023 , 9 : 02pm Why is the Left in the driving seat of government after 13 years of Tory rule ? Charles Moore 14 Apr 2023 , 9 : 00pm Parents ’ fury as children told a sex change can stop bullying By Benedict Smith 14 Apr 2023 , 8 : 56pm Grand National 2023 sweepstake kit : Printable download for the big race By Telegraph Sport 14 Apr 2023 , 8 : 49pm Grand National 2023 tips : Latest odds , horses to watch plus expert and celebrity picks By Tom Ward 14 Apr 2023 , 8 : 49pm Grand National 2023 runners and riders confirmed list : A horse - by - horse guide By Marcus Armytage 14 Apr 2023 , 8 : 48pm The Telegraph Back to top Follow us on : Facebook icon Instagram icon Twitter icon Snapchat icon LinkedIn icon YouTube icon Help Centre About us Telegraph Extra Reader Prints Branded Content Syndication and Commissioning Guidelines Privacy Terms and Conditions Advertising Terms Fantasy Sport UK Voucher Codes Betting Offers Modern Slavery Tax Strategy Broadband and Mobile Deals Wine Cellar © Telegraph Media Group Limited 2023