

 

 

 

 

 











































































































































Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming | Culture | Arts, music and lifestyle reporting from Germany | DW | 30.01.2022





































40 captures
30 Jan 2022 - 01 Apr 2023















Dec
JAN
Nov




31




2021
2022
2023







success
fail






















 About this capture






COLLECTED BY



		Organization: Internet Archive


	  Focused crawls are collections of frequently-updated webcrawl data from narrow (as opposed to broad or wide) web crawls, often focused on a single domain or subdomain.




Collection: dw-world.de




TIMESTAMPS





The Wayback Machine - https://web.archive.org/web/20220131121736/https://www.dw.com/en/crocheted-ocean-art-to-fight-global-warming/a-60428249


















Visit the new DW website






Take a look at the beta version of dw.com. We're not done yet! Your opinion can help us make it better.


Go to the new dw.com






We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.


More info
OK





Inhalt
Navigation
Weitere Inhalte
Metanavigation
Suche
Choose from 30 Languages










Albanian Shqip


Amharic አማርኛ


Arabic العربية


Bengali বাংলা


Bosnian B/H/S


Bulgarian Български



Chinese (Simplified) 简



Chinese (Traditional) 繁




Croatian Hrvatski


Dari دری 


English English


French Français


German Deutsch


Greek Ελληνικά


Hausa Hausa


Hindi हिन्दी




Indonesian Indonesia


Kiswahili Kiswahili


Macedonian Македонски


Pashto پښتو


Persian فارسی


Polish Polski


Portuguese Português do Brasil


Portuguese Português para África




Romanian Română


Russian Русский


Serbian Српски/Srpski


Spanish Español


Turkish Türkçe


Ukrainian Українська


Urdu اردو












Wrong language? Change it here

DW.COM has chosen English as your language setting. 








DW.COM in 30 languages

DW AKADEMIE

ABOUT DW

DW.COM









Deutsche Welle



















TOP STORIES


Coronavirus

World

Africa

Crime Fighters

The 77 Percent

Africa on the Move



Asia

Europe

Americas

Middle East



Germany

Berlin Wall



Business

Founders Valley



Science



Environment

Global Ideas



Living Planet



Culture

Film

Books



Music

Arts

Digital Culture

Lifestyle

Travel



BTHVN2020



Sports



SPECIAL

100 Must-Reads
50 kitchens, one city
Baking Bread
DW Freedom
Expedition Humboldt
Meet the Germans
Planet Berlin





Media Center



Live TV


All media content


Latest Programs


Podcasts





TV


Schedule and Reception



TV Programs



TV programs

Arts.21
Business
Check-in
Close up
Conflict Zone
Covid-19 Special
DocFilm
DW News
Eco Africa


Eco India
Euromaxx
Faith Matters
Focus on Europe
Global 3000
In Good Shape
Kick off!
Made in Germany
Reporter


REV
Shift
Sports Life
The Day
The 77 Percent
Tomorrow Today
To the Point
World Stories





RADIO


LEARN GERMAN



German Courses

German Courses
Quick start



Harry



Deutsch Interaktiv

Radio D



Mission Europe



Deutsch - warum nicht?



Audiotrainer



Deutschtrainer

Die Bienenretter




German XXL

German XXL
Deutsch Aktuell

Deutsch im Fokus

Telenovela

Bandtagebuch

Landeskunde




Community D

Community D
Das Porträt

Podcasts & Newsletter

Service




Teaching German

Teaching German
DW im Unterricht

Unterrichtsreihen

Deutschlehrer-Info








Coronavirus
World
Germany
Business
Science
Environment
Culture
Sports





TOP STORIES

/

Culture









Advertisement








Culture
Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming
The Crochet Coral Reef project by Christine and Margaret Wertheim is a an art installation in which math, science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations.


























 

 
Crochet Coral Reef mixes handicrafts, environmentalism and feminism



In 2005, newspapers were filled with articles about human-caused destruction of the Great Barrier Reef, the world's largest coral reef system. For Christine and Margaret Wertheim, it hit close to home — literally. The California-based twin sisters, one of them a former painter and poet and the other a science writer, grew up in Queensland, Australia, where the reef is located. They decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them, too.      Around 2005, scientists started finding that coral bleaching events, like in the Great Barrier Reef (above), were due to ocean warming caused by humans  What started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world's largest collective art and science initiative: the Crochet Coral Reef project. Along with the Wertheim sisters, more than 20,000 participants — mostly women — around  the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches, creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large-scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation. "If anyone had said to me in 2005 that I'd still be crocheting corals in 2022, I would've thought they were mad," Margaret Wertheim told DW. "The scale that the project has been embraced at on the international level is absolutely delightful ... We had no idea it could evolve to this big." Since the project's launch, an estimated 2 million people have seen Crochet Coral Reef in galleries and museums around the world. In 2019 it gained widespread international attention at the Venice Biennale. Now the Frieder Burda Museum in Baden-Baden, southwestern Germany, is featuring the installation in a giant retrospective show, titled "Value and Transformation of Corals."      Crochet Coral Roof draws on the sisters' professional background, as well as their love for handicrafts  Crocheting with hyperbolic code The museum's entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals, towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye-catchingly bright colors, mirroring the vibrancy of nature. Both the sisters' reef creations, which combine videotape, tinsel and detritus along with yarn, and a community-based creation (known as a "Satellite Reef") are on display. Together, they transform the museum into a fantastic and uncannily realistic underwater landscape.     The Wertheim sisters' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritus  But the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs.  Corals' ruffled shapes are living manifestations of what is known as hyperbolic geometry. Unlike the Euclidian geometry, which deals with flat surfaces, hyperbolic geometry captures curved planes in space. Such forms are found in nature, as they are ideal ways to maximize surface area, which is often essential for survival.  "All the frilly forms that we make are basically derivatives of a kind of service called hyperbolic geometry, which uses alternative geometry that mathematicians discovered fairly late in history, but corals have been doing for hundreds of millions of years," Wertheim explained.      Corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures, which mathematicians longer thought impossible to model  Mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model, but in 1997, Daina Taimina, a mathematician at Cornell University in New York, realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries: crocheting. The Crochet Coral Reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern, turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics. "So there's this lovely story, that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry," said Wertheim, who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens. At its most basic, the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate. If the rate remains unvaried, a perfect hyperbolic form emerges, "something you could take into a math classroom," Wertheim said. "But mathematically perfectly regular things very rarely appear in nature. A coral is growing and maybe there is a bit more sunlight on this side, or the nutrient flow of water is a bit more on this side, so it grows a bit more curly on this side. "     Corals are hyperbolic structures, and crocheting allows their form to be recreated  She and her sister encourage contributors to "queer the code," or vary the rate of stitch increase. What results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect, varied, diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution. "Just like there's no end to the life on Earth — you know, there'll be creatures in a million years that we haven't even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that, too, and we hadn't really expected that," Wertheim said.     Contributors to Crochet Coral Reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination   Community-based art Contributed corals are combined into the Satellite Reefs, the crowdsourced element of Crochet Coral Reef, yet another parallel to actual coral reefs, which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps.  As of 2021, over 48 Satellite Reefs had been made in different locations around the world. In non-pandemic times, museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet. For the Frieder Burda exhibition, the museum put out a call in a popular German women's magazine, whose huge readership meant creations poured in from around the German-speaking world and beyond. The resulting Satellite Reef is the largest to date by far, featuring more than 40,000 corals. Previously, the largest Satellite Reefs featured around 4,000-5,000 corals. "We always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet, which is a wonderfully expressive medium, and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now, not just some future nebulous, maybe in 100-years-time problem," Wertheim said.     Since 2005, over 20,000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the Satellite Reefs  Global warming has only intensified since 2005, and Wertheim believes it has contributed to the project's expanding success. "The problem of global warming has only got worse and worse and worse with each passing year, and so the relevance of the project to the most important issue of our times just gets more and more. That's the bad thing." But she also believes the project has benefitted from a pivot by museums toward more community-oriented programming. "Lots of museums and institutions, galleries, etc., really want to do participatory projects which engage the audience directly rather than, say, having the audience just come to the museums to look at works by famous artists," she said. While demand to show Crochet Coral Reef has increased, as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit, its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves, Wertheim explains. "Everybody wants the corals. Everybody loves the corals. The people in the region need the corals. But funding the upkeep of the corals is a hard thing to get anybody to step up to the plate to do ... They're not in the monetized system, and community art is a bit like that. It's not within the monetary system of the art world." The exhibition "Value and Transformation of Corals" is on display at the Museum Frieder Burda from January 29 through June 26. Virtual tours are available via the museum website.   Edited by: Elizabeth Grenier




DW recommends





Could the Red Sea's heat-resilient corals help restore the world's dying reefs? 
Corals in the Gulf of Aqaba have a unique evolutionary history that could help them survive the climate crisis. Scientists even hope to breed their resilience into other reefs.   





Looming mass extinction could be biggest 'since the dinosaurs,' says WWF

More plants and animals than ever before are on a global list of threatened species, with the World Wildlife Fund Germany warning that more than 1 million species could go extinct within the next decades.
  



WWW links





"The beautiful math of coral" TED talk

TED talk on hyperbolic geometry by Margaret Wertheim












Date
30.01.2022


Author
Cristina Burack



Related Subjects
Great Barrier Reef, COP 26: Everything you need to know, Climate change


Keywords
Crochet Coral Reef,
Margaret Wertheim,
Christine Wertheim,
coral reefs,
Great Barrier Reef,
global warming,
community art,
crocheting,
hyperbolic geometry,
Environmental art

Send us your feedback.


Print
Print this page


Permalink
https://p.dw.com/p/45Y9B











TOP STORIES

Coronavirus
World
Germany
Business
Science
Environment
Culture
Sports
 
A - Z Index


MEDIA CENTER

Live TV
All media content
Latest Programs
Podcasts


TV

Schedule and Reception
TV Programs
 
RADIO



LEARN GERMAN

German Courses
German XXL
Community D
Teaching German


ABOUT DW

Who we are
Press
GMF
Business & Sales
Advertising
Travel


SERVICE

Reception
Apps & Co.
Newsletters & Co.
FAQ
Contact
 
DW AKADEMIE

About us
Media Development
Master's Degree
Traineeship
Training


© 2022 Deutsche Welle |
Privacy Policy |
Accessibility Statement |
Legal notice |
Contact
| Mobile version








Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming | Culture | Arts , music and lifestyle reporting from Germany | DW | 30 . 01 . 2022 40 captures 30 Jan 2022 - 01 Apr 2023 Dec JAN Nov 31 2021 2022 2023 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Organization : Internet Archive Focused crawls are collections of frequently - updated webcrawl data from narrow ( as opposed to broad or wide ) web crawls , often focused on a single domain or subdomain . Collection : dw - world . de TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine - https :// web . archive . org / web / 20220131121736 / https :// www . dw . com / en / crocheted - ocean - art - to - fight - global - warming / a - 60428249 Visit the new DW website Take a look at the beta version of dw . com . We ' re not done yet ! Your opinion can help us make it better . Go to the new dw . com We use cookies to improve our service for you . You can find more information in our data protection declaration . More info OK Inhalt Navigation Weitere Inhalte Metanavigation Suche Choose from 30 Languages Albanian Shqip Amharic አማርኛ Arabic العربية Bengali ব াং ল া Bosnian B / H / S Bulgarian Български Chinese ( Simplified ) 简 Chinese ( Traditional ) 繁 Croatian Hrvatski Dari دری English English French Français German Deutsch Greek Ελληνικά Hausa Hausa Hindi ह ि न ् द ी Indonesian Indonesia Kiswahili Kiswahili Macedonian Македонски Pashto پښتو Persian فارسی Polish Polski Portuguese Português do Brasil Portuguese Português para África Romanian Română Russian Русский Serbian Српски / Srpski Spanish Español Turkish Türkçe Ukrainian Українська Urdu اردو Wrong language ? Change it here DW . COM has chosen English as your language setting . DW . COM in 30 languages DW AKADEMIE ABOUT DW DW . COM Deutsche Welle TOP STORIES Coronavirus World Africa Crime Fighters The 77 Percent Africa on the Move Asia Europe Americas Middle East Germany Berlin Wall Business Founders Valley Science Environment Global Ideas Living Planet Culture Film Books Music Arts Digital Culture Lifestyle Travel BTHVN2020 Sports SPECIAL 100 Must - Reads 50 kitchens , one city Baking Bread DW Freedom Expedition Humboldt Meet the Germans Planet Berlin Media Center Live TV All media content Latest Programs Podcasts TV Schedule and Reception TV Programs TV programs Arts . 21 Business Check - in Close up Conflict Zone Covid - 19 Special DocFilm DW News Eco Africa Eco India Euromaxx Faith Matters Focus on Europe Global 3000 In Good Shape Kick off ! Made in Germany Reporter REV Shift Sports Life The Day The 77 Percent Tomorrow Today To the Point World Stories RADIO LEARN GERMAN German Courses German Courses Quick start Harry Deutsch Interaktiv Radio D Mission Europe Deutsch - warum nicht ? Audiotrainer Deutschtrainer Die Bienenretter German XXL German XXL Deutsch Aktuell Deutsch im Fokus Telenovela Bandtagebuch Landeskunde Community D Community D Das Porträt Podcasts & Newsletter Service Teaching German Teaching German DW im Unterricht Unterrichtsreihen Deutschlehrer - Info Coronavirus World Germany Business Science Environment Culture Sports TOP STORIES / Culture Advertisement Culture Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming The Crochet Coral Reef project by Christine and Margaret Wertheim is a an art installation in which math , science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations . Crochet Coral Reef mixes handicrafts , environmentalism and feminism In 2005 , newspapers were filled with articles about human - caused destruction of the Great Barrier Reef , the world ' s largest coral reef system . For Christine and Margaret Wertheim , it hit close to home — literally . The California - based twin sisters , one of them a former painter and poet and the other a science writer , grew up in Queensland , Australia , where the reef is located . They decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them , too . Around 2005 , scientists started finding that coral bleaching events , like in the Great Barrier Reef ( above ), were due to ocean warming caused by humans What started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world ' s largest collective art and science initiative : the Crochet Coral Reef project . Along with the Wertheim sisters , more than 20 , 000 participants — mostly women — around the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches , creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large - scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation . " If anyone had said to me in 2005 that I ' d still be crocheting corals in 2022 , I would ' ve thought they were mad ," Margaret Wertheim told DW . " The scale that the project has been embraced at on the international level is absolutely delightful ... We had no idea it could evolve to this big ." Since the project ' s launch , an estimated 2 million people have seen Crochet Coral Reef in galleries and museums around the world . In 2019 it gained widespread international attention at the Venice Biennale . Now the Frieder Burda Museum in Baden - Baden , southwestern Germany , is featuring the installation in a giant retrospective show , titled " Value and Transformation of Corals ." Crochet Coral Roof draws on the sisters ' professional background , as well as their love for handicrafts Crocheting with hyperbolic code The museum ' s entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals , towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye - catchingly bright colors , mirroring the vibrancy of nature . Both the sisters ' reef creations , which combine videotape , tinsel and detritus along with yarn , and a community - based creation ( known as a " Satellite Reef ") are on display . Together , they transform the museum into a fantastic and uncannily realistic underwater landscape . The Wertheim sisters ' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritus But the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs . Corals ' ruffled shapes are living manifestations of what is known as hyperbolic geometry . Unlike the Euclidian geometry , which deals with flat surfaces , hyperbolic geometry captures curved planes in space . Such forms are found in nature , as they are ideal ways to maximize surface area , which is often essential for survival . " All the frilly forms that we make are basically derivatives of a kind of service called hyperbolic geometry , which uses alternative geometry that mathematicians discovered fairly late in history , but corals have been doing for hundreds of millions of years ," Wertheim explained . Corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures , which mathematicians longer thought impossible to model Mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model , but in 1997 , Daina Taimina , a mathematician at Cornell University in New York , realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries : crocheting . The Crochet Coral Reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern , turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics . " So there ' s this lovely story , that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry ," said Wertheim , who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens . At its most basic , the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate . If the rate remains unvaried , a perfect hyperbolic form emerges , " something you could take into a math classroom ," Wertheim said . " But mathematically perfectly regular things very rarely appear in nature . A coral is growing and maybe there is a bit more sunlight on this side , or the nutrient flow of water is a bit more on this side , so it grows a bit more curly on this side . " Corals are hyperbolic structures , and crocheting allows their form to be recreated She and her sister encourage contributors to " queer the code ," or vary the rate of stitch increase . What results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect , varied , diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution . " Just like there ' s no end to the life on Earth — you know , there ' ll be creatures in a million years that we haven ' t even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that , too , and we hadn ' t really expected that ," Wertheim said . Contributors to Crochet Coral Reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination Community - based art Contributed corals are combined into the Satellite Reefs , the crowdsourced element of Crochet Coral Reef , yet another parallel to actual coral reefs , which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps . As of 2021 , over 48 Satellite Reefs had been made in different locations around the world . In non - pandemic times , museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet . For the Frieder Burda exhibition , the museum put out a call in a popular German women ' s magazine , whose huge readership meant creations poured in from around the German - speaking world and beyond . The resulting Satellite Reef is the largest to date by far , featuring more than 40 , 000 corals . Previously , the largest Satellite Reefs featured around 4 , 000 - 5 , 000 corals . " We always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet , which is a wonderfully expressive medium , and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now , not just some future nebulous , maybe in 100 - years - time problem ," Wertheim said . Since 2005 , over 20 , 000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the Satellite Reefs Global warming has only intensified since 2005 , and Wertheim believes it has contributed to the project ' s expanding success . " The problem of global warming has only got worse and worse and worse with each passing year , and so the relevance of the project to the most important issue of our times just gets more and more . That ' s the bad thing ." But she also believes the project has benefitted from a pivot by museums toward more community - oriented programming . " Lots of museums and institutions , galleries , etc ., really want to do participatory projects which engage the audience directly rather than , say , having the audience just come to the museums to look at works by famous artists ," she said . While demand to show Crochet Coral Reef has increased , as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit , its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves , Wertheim explains . " Everybody wants the corals . Everybody loves the corals . The people in the region need the corals . But funding the upkeep of the corals is a hard thing to get anybody to step up to the plate to do ... They ' re not in the monetized system , and community art is a bit like that . It ' s not within the monetary system of the art world ." The exhibition " Value and Transformation of Corals " is on display at the Museum Frieder Burda from January 29 through June 26 . Virtual tours are available via the museum website . Edited by : Elizabeth Grenier DW recommends Could the Red Sea ' s heat - resilient corals help restore the world ' s dying reefs ? Corals in the Gulf of Aqaba have a unique evolutionary history that could help them survive the climate crisis . Scientists even hope to breed their resilience into other reefs . Looming mass extinction could be biggest ' since the dinosaurs ,' says WWF More plants and animals than ever before are on a global list of threatened species , with the World Wildlife Fund Germany warning that more than 1 million species could go extinct within the next decades . WWW links " The beautiful math of coral " TED talk TED talk on hyperbolic geometry by Margaret Wertheim Date 30 . 01 . 2022 Author Cristina Burack Related Subjects Great Barrier Reef , COP 26 : Everything you need to know , Climate change Keywords Crochet Coral Reef , Margaret Wertheim , Christine Wertheim , coral reefs , Great Barrier Reef , global warming , community art , crocheting , hyperbolic geometry , Environmental art Send us your feedback . Print Print this page Permalink https :// p . dw . com / p / 45Y9B TOP STORIES Coronavirus World Germany Business Science Environment Culture Sports A - Z Index MEDIA CENTER Live TV All media content Latest Programs Podcasts TV Schedule and Reception TV Programs RADIO LEARN GERMAN German Courses German XXL Community D Teaching German ABOUT DW Who we are Press GMF Business & Sales Advertising Travel SERVICE Reception Apps & Co . Newsletters & Co . FAQ Contact DW AKADEMIE About us Media Development Master ' s Degree Traineeship Training © 2022 Deutsche Welle | Privacy Policy | Accessibility Statement | Legal notice | Contact | Mobile version