



Crochet - Wikipedia





































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Etymology







2Origins







3Irish crochet







4Modern practice and culture







5Materials


				Toggle Materials subsection
			




5.1Crochet hook







5.2Yarn









6Process







7Types of stitches







8International crochet terms and notations







9Differences from and similarities to knitting







10Charity and activism







11Mathematics and hyperbolic crochet







12Architecture


				Toggle Architecture subsection
			




12.1Yarn bombing







12.2Styles in Crochet









13See also







14References







15Further reading







16External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Crochet




49 languages



AfrikaansالعربيةবাংলাCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaעבריתქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаLatinaLëtzebuergeschLietuviųMagyarमराठीမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்TürkçeУкраїнськаاردو中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookThis article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Crochet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)For a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae, see Crochet (insect anatomy). For the baseball pitcher, see Garrett Crochet.
Not to be confused with crotchet.
Crochet (English:  /kroʊˈʃeɪ/;[1] French: [kʁɔʃɛ][2]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn, thread, or strands of other materials.[3] The name is derived from the French term crochet, meaning 'hook'. Hooks can be made from a variety of materials, such as metal, wood, bamboo, or plastic. The key difference between crochet and knitting, beyond the implements used for their production, is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun, while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time. Some variant forms of crochet, such as Tunisian crochet and broomstick lace, do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time.

 Demonstration of crochet technique

Etymology[edit]
The word crochet is derived from the French crochet, a diminutive of croche, in turn from the Germanic croc, both meaning "hook".[3] It was used in 17th-century French lace-making, where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace. The word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile, and the hooked needle used to produce it.[4]
In 1567, the tailor of Mary, Queen of Scots, Jehan de Compiegne, supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet, "soye à coudre et crochetz".[5]

Origins[edit]
 19th century crochet from Orvieto, Italy
Knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century CE, but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in Europe during the 19th century.[6] Earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding, a different looped yarn technique.

 A crocheted purse described in 1823 in Penélopé
The first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the Dutch magazine Penélopé in 1823. This includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse, of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread.[7] The first is "simple open crochet" (crochet simple ajour), a mesh of chain-stitch arches. The second (illustrated here) starts in a semi-open form (demi jour), where chain-stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip-stitch crochet, and closes with a star made with "double-crochet stitches" (dubbelde hekelsteek: double-crochet in British terminology; single-crochet in US).[8] The third purse is made entirely in double-crochet. The instructions prescribe the use of a tambour needle (as illustrated below) and introduce a number of decorative techniques.
The earliest dated reference in English to garments made of cloth produced by looping yarn with a hook—shepherd's knitting—is in The Memoirs of a Highland Lady by Elizabeth Grant (1797–1830). The journal entry, itself, is dated 1812 but was not recorded in its subsequently published form until some time between 1845 and 1867, and the actual date of publication was first in 1898.[9] Nonetheless, the 1833 volume of Penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd's hook, and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn.[10]
In 1844, one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states:

Crochet needles, sometimes called Shepherds' hooks, are made of steel, ivory, or box-wood. They have a hook at one end similar in shape to a fish-hook, by which the wool or silk is caught and drawn through the work. These instruments are to be procured of various sizes...[11]
Two years later, the same author writes:

Crochet, — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in Scotland, with a small hooked needle called a shepherd's hook, — has, within the last seven years, aided by taste and fashion, obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature. It derives its present name from the French; the instrument with which it is worked being by them, from its crooked shape, termed 'crochet.' This art has attained its highest degree of perfection in England, whence it has been transplanted to France and Germany, and both countries, although unjustifiably, have claimed the invention.[12]
An instruction book from 1846 describes Shepherd or single crochet as what in current British usage is either called single crochet or slip-stitch crochet, with U.S. American terminology always using the latter (reserving single crochet for use as noted above).[13] It similarly equates "Double" and "French crochet".[14]

 Tambour embroidery in the Diderot Encyclopedia
Notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely British origin, there is solid evidence of a connection between French tambour embroidery and crochet. French tambour embroidery was illustrated in detail in 1763 in Diderot's Encyclopedia. The tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present-day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique. The 1823 Penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms.[15] This equivalence is retained in the 4th edition of that work, 1847.[16]

 Shepherd's hook, 19th-century tapered hook, modern inline hook
The strong taper of the shepherd's hook eases the production of slip-stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time. Early yarn hooks were also continuously tapered but gradually enough to accommodate multiple loops. The design with a cylindrical shaft that is commonplace today was largely reserved for tambour-style steel needles. Both types gradually merged into the modern form that appeared toward the end of the 19th century, including both tapered and cylindrical segments, and the continuously tapered bone hook remained in industrial production until World War II.[citation needed]
The early instruction books make frequent reference to the alternative use of 'ivory, bone, or wooden hooks' and 'steel needles in a handle', as appropriate to the stitch being made.[citation needed] Taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd's- and single crochet, and the similar equivalence of French- and double crochet, there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd's knitting, leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively; a distinction that is still made. The locus of the fusion of all these elements—the "invention" noted above—has yet to be determined, as does the origin of shepherd's knitting.
Shepherd's hooks are still being made for local slip-stitch crochet traditions.[citation needed] The form in the accompanying photograph is typical for contemporary production. A longer continuously tapering design intermediate between it and the 19th-century tapered hook was also in earlier production, commonly being made from the handles of forks and spoons.[citation needed]

Irish crochet[edit]
 Detail of a Portuguese crocheted tablecloth, about 1970
 Irish crochet lace, late 19th century. The design of this example is closely based on Flemish needle lace of the 17th century.
In the 19th century, as Ireland was facing the Great Irish Famine (1845–1849), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief[17] (the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished Irish workers).[18] Men, women, children joined a co-operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the Great Irish Famine. Schools to teach crocheting were started. Teachers were trained and sent across Ireland to teach this craft. When the Irish immigrated to the Americas, they were able to take with them crocheting.[19] Mademoiselle Riego de la Branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of Irish Crochet, publishing the first book of patterns in 1846. Irish lace became popular in Europe and America, and was made in quantity until the first World War.[20]

Modern practice and culture[edit]
Fashions in crochet changed with the end of the Victorian era in the 1890s. Crocheted laces in the new Edwardian era, peaking between 1910 and 1920, became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching.[citation needed]

 Filet crochet by an internee at Manzanar War Relocation Center, 1943. Photograph by Ansel Adams
The strong Victorian colours disappeared, though, and new publications called for white or pale threads, except for fancy purses, which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded. After World War I, far fewer crochet patterns were published, and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th-century patterns.[citation needed] After World War II, from the late 1940s until the early 1960s, there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts, particularly in the United States, with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies, potholders, and other home items, along with updates of earlier publications. These patterns called for thicker threads and yarns than in earlier patterns and included variegated colors. The craft remained primarily a homemaker's art until the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares, a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors.

 Detail on gold thread crochet in a mid-20th century short jacket designed by Sybil Connolly
Although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity, the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and DIY, as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn. As well as books and classes, there are YouTube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet.[21]
Filet crochet, Tunisian crochet, tapestry crochet, broomstick lace, hairpin lace, cro-hooking, and Irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method.

 Bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in Guatemala.
 Crochet table decor, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well. Christopher Kane's Fall 2011 Ready-to-Wear collection[22] makes intensive use of the granny square, one of the most basic of crochet motifs. In addition, crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show Project Runway.[citation needed] Websites such as Etsy and Ravelry have made it easier for individual hobbyists to sell and distribute their patterns or projects across the internet.

Materials[edit]
Basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted, most commonly yarn or thread. Yarn, one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting, has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns. Acrylic can also be used when crocheting, as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool. Additional tools are convenient for making related accessories. Examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts, which can be used to make tassels, fringe, and many other items; a pom-pom circle, used to make pom-poms; a tape measure and a gauge measure, both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches; a row counter; and occasionally plastic rings, which are used for special projects.
In recent years, yarn selections have moved beyond synthetic and plant and animal-based fibers to include bamboo, qiviut, hemp, and banana stalks, to name a few. Many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to "go green" and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags, old t-shirts or sheets, VCR or Cassette tape, and ribbon.[citation needed]

Crochet hook[edit]
 Aluminium crochet hooks
Main article: Crochet hook
The crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials, such as bone, bamboo, aluminium, plastic, and steel.[23] Because sizing is categorized by the diameter of the hook's shaft, a crafter aims to create stitches of a certain size in order to reach a particular gauge specified in a given pattern. If gauge is not reached with one hook, another is used until the stitches made are the needed size. Crafters may have a preference for one type of hook material over another due to aesthetic appeal, yarn glide, or hand disorders such as arthritis, where bamboo or wood hooks are favored over metal for the perceived warmth and flexibility during use. Hook grips and ergonomic hook handles are also available to assist crafters.
Steel crochet hooks range in size from 0.4 to 3.5 millimeters, or from 00 to 16 in American sizing. These hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace.
Aluminium, bamboo, and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2.5 to 19 millimeters in size, or from B to S in American sizing.[citation needed]
Artisan-made hooks are often made of hand-turned woods, sometimes decorated with semi-precious stones or beads.
Crochet hooks used for Tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle, while double-ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle. There is also a double hooked apparatus called a Cro-hook that has become popular.[citation needed]
A hairpin loom is often used to create lacy and long stitches, known as hairpin lace. While this is not in itself a hook, it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches.
See : List of United States standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes

Yarn[edit]
Main article: Yarn
 A hank of wool yarn (center) is uncoiled into its basic loop. A tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting. Crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.
Yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls, or skeins (hanks), although it may also be wound on spools or cones. Skeins and balls are generally sold with a yarn band, a label that describes the yarn's weight, length, dye lot, fiber content, washing instructions, suggested needle size, likely gauge, etc. It is a common practice to save the yarn band for future reference, especially if additional skeins must be purchased. Crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot. The dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color; skeins from different dye lots, even if very similar in color, are usually slightly different and may produce a visible stripe when added onto existing work. If insufficient yarn of a single dye lot is bought to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online.
The thickness or weight of the yarn is a significant factor in determining how many stitches and rows are required to cover a given area for a given stitch pattern. This is also termed the gauge. Thicker yarns generally require large-diameter crochet hooks, whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks. Hence, thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches, and therefore less time, to work up a given project. The recommended gauge for a given ball of yarn can be found on the label that surrounds the skein when buying in stores. Patterns and motifs are coarser with thicker yarns and produce bold visual effects, whereas thinner yarns are best for refined or delicate pattern-work. Yarns are standardly grouped by thickness into six categories: superfine, fine, light, medium, bulky and superbulky. Quantitatively, thickness is measured by the number of wraps per inch (WPI). The related weight per unit length is usually measured in tex or denier.

 Transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn (top) into a ball in which the yarn emerges from the center (bottom). Using the latter is better for needlework, since the yarn is much less likely to tangle.
Before use, hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center, making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled. The winding process may be performed by hand or done with a ball winder and swift.[citation needed]
A yarn's usefulness is judged by several factors, such as its loft (its ability to trap air), its resilience (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its hand (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its hairiness (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and its appearance, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features. Other factors include allergenicity, speed of drying, resistance to chemicals, moths, and mildew, melting point and flammability, retention of static electricity, and the propensity to accept dyes. Desirable properties may vary for different projects, so there is no one "best" yarn.

 The two possible twists of yarn
Although crochet may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers. In spinning, the fibers are twisted so that the yarn resists breaking under tension; the twisting may be done in either direction, resulting in a Z-twist or S-twist yarn. If the fibers are first aligned by combing them and the spinner uses a worsted type drafting method such as the short forward draw, the yarn is smoother and called a worsted; by contrast, if the fibers are carded but not combed and the spinner uses a woolen drafting method such as the long backward draw, the yarn is fuzzier and called woolen-spun. The fibers making up a yarn may be continuous filament fibers such as silk and many synthetics, or they may be staples (fibers of an average length, typically a few inches); naturally filament fibers are sometimes cut up into staples before spinning. The strength of the spun yarn against breaking is determined by the amount of twist, the length of the fibers and the thickness of the yarn. In general, yarns become stronger with more twist (also called worst), longer fibers and thicker yarns (more fibers); for example, thinner yarns require more twist than do thicker yarns to resist breaking under tension. The thickness of the yarn may vary along its length; a slub is a much thicker section in which a mass of fibers is incorporated into the yarn.[citation needed]
The spun fibers are generally divided into animal fibers, plant and synthetic fibers. These fiber types are chemically different, corresponding to proteins, carbohydrates and synthetic polymers, respectively. Animal fibers include silk, but generally are long hairs of animals such as sheep (wool), goat (angora, or cashmere goat), rabbit (angora), llama, alpaca, dog, cat, camel, yak, and muskox (qiviut). Plants used for fibers include cotton, flax (for linen), bamboo, ramie, hemp, jute, nettle, raffia, yucca, coconut husk, banana trees, soy and corn. Rayon and acetate fibers are also produced from cellulose mainly derived from trees. Common synthetic fibers include acrylics,[24] polyesters such as dacron and ingeo, nylon and other polyamides, and olefins such as polypropylene. Of these types, wool is generally favored for crochet, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting; however, wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it. It is also common to blend different fibers in the yarn, e.g., 85% alpaca and 15% silk. Even within a type of fiber, there can be great variety in the length and thickness of the fibers; for example, Merino wool and Egyptian cotton are favored because they produce exceptionally long, thin (fine) fibers for their type.[citation needed]
A single spun yarn may be crochet as is, or braided or plied with another. In plying, two or more yarns are spun together, almost always in the opposite sense from which they were spun individually; for example, two Z-twist yarns are usually plied with an S-twist. The opposing twist relieves some of the yarns' tendency to curl up and produces a thicker, balanced yarn. Plied yarns may themselves be plied together, producing cabled yarns or multi-stranded yarns. Sometimes, the yarns being plied are fed at different rates, so that one yarn loops around the other, as in bouclé. The single yarns may be dyed separately before plying, or afterwards to give the yarn a uniform look.[citation needed]
The dyeing of yarns is a complex art. Yarns need not be dyed; or they may be dyed one color, or a great variety of colors. Dyeing may be done industrially, by hand or even hand-painted onto the yarn. A great variety of synthetic dyes have been developed since the synthesis of indigo dye in the mid-19th century; however, natural dyes are also possible, although they are generally less brilliant. The color-scheme of a yarn is sometimes called its colorway. Variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes.[citation needed]

Process[edit]
 A close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace-weight mohair yarn.
 Crochet tablecloth, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip-knot loop on the hook (though other methods, such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used), pulling another loop through the first loop, and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length. The chain is either turned and worked in rows, or joined to the beginning of the row with a slip stitch and worked in rounds. Rounds can also be created by working many stitches into a single loop. Stitches are made by pulling one or more loops through each loop of the chain. At any one time at the end of a stitch, there is only one loop left on the hook. Tunisian crochet, however, draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time. Like knitting, crochet can be worked either flat (back and forth in rows) or in the round (in spirals, such as when making tubular pieces).[citation needed]

Types of stitches[edit]
 Indian Crochet white tablecloth about 1970.
There are six main types of basic stitches (the following description uses US crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the UK and Europe).

Chain stitch – the most basic of all stitches and used to begin most projects.
Slip stitch – used to join chain stitch to form a ring.
Single crochet stitch (called double crochet stitch in the UK) – easiest stitch to master
Half-double crochet stitch (called half treble stitch in the UK) – the 'in-between' stitch, sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications
Double crochet stitch (called treble stitch in the UK) (yarn over once) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch
Treble (or triple) crochet stitch (called double treble stitch in the UK) (yarn over twice)
While the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same, they differ in height and thickness.[citation needed]
The more advanced stitches are often combinations of these basic stitches, or are made by inserting the hook into the work in unusual locations. More advanced stitches include the shell stitch, V stitch, spike stitch, Afghan stitch, butterfly stitch, popcorn stitch, cluster stitch, and crocodile stitch.

International crochet terms and notations[edit]
Main article: List of crochet stitches
 Some crochet symbols, abbreviations, and US/UK terms
In the English-speaking crochet world, basic stitches have different names that vary by country. The differences are usually referred to as UK/US or British/American. Crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations.[25] To help counter confusion when reading patterns, a diagramming system using a standard international notation has come into use (illustration, left). In the United States, crochet terminology and sizing guidelines, as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling, are primarily regulated by the Craft Yarn Council.[26]
Another terminological difference is known as tension (UK) and gauge (US). Individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and, if unmeasured, these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches. In order to control for this inconsistency, printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric. An individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook. North Americans call this gauge, referring to the result of these adjustments; British crocheters speak of tension, which refers to the crafter's grip on the yarn while producing stitches.[citation needed]

Differences from and similarities to knitting[edit]
One of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles. In most crochet, the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook (with the exception being Tunisian crochet), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously. Dropped stitches, which can unravel a knitted fabric, rarely interfere with crochet work, due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet. In knitting, each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below, whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it. If a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks, the stitches above and below remain intact, and because of the complex looping of each stitch, the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed.[citation needed]
Round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook, but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double-ended needles. Many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined, either by sewing or crocheting, whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric, such as entrelac.[citation needed]
Freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece. It is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires.
Knitting can be accomplished by machine, while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand. The height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different: a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools, and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch.[27]
While most crochet is made with a hook, there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom. This is called loomchet.[28] Slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting. Each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off. A person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits, purls, and cables, and get a similar result.[29]
It is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting, tends to have less "give" than knitted fabric, and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items. Although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch, both made with the same size yarn and needle/hook, it is not necessarily true for crochet in general. Most crochet uses far less than 1/3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces, and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn. Tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces. According to sources[30] claiming to have tested the 1/3 more yarn assertion, a single crochet stitch (sc) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch, but more yarn than stockinette stitch. Any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric. Cluster stitches, which are in fact multiple stitches worked together, will use the most length.[citation needed]
Standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric, more like knit garter stitch. This is part of why they use more yarn. Slip stitch can produce a fabric much like stockinette that is thinner and therefore uses less yarn.
Any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted, provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used, but the cord's properties should be taken into account. For example, lofty, thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted, which does not crush their airy structure, while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for Amigurumi crochet.[31]



Differences between crochet and knitting



Most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time.  Crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools, as shown here.






Knitting uses two or more straight needles that carry multiple stitches.






Unlike crochet, knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds.





Charity and activism[edit]
It has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war. People have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals, for sick patients and also for newborn babies. Sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose, such as crocheting for homeless shelters, nursing homes, etc.
It is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats (commonly referred to as "chemo caps") and donate them to cancer treatment centers, for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair. During October pink hats and scarves are made and proceeds are donated to breast cancer funds. Organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include Knots of Love, Crochet for Cancer,[32] and Soldiers' Angels.[33] These organizations offer warm useful items for people in need.
In 2020, people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the Australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches, koala mittens and wildlife nests.[34] This was an international effort to help during the particularly bad bushfire season which devastated local ecological systems.
A group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20,000 contributors in what became the Crochet Coral Reef Project.[35] To promote awareness of the effects of global warming, their creations have been displayed in galleries and museums by an estimated 2 million people.[35] Many creations apply hyperbolic (curved) geometric shapes—distinguished from Euclidean (flat) geometry—to emulate natural structures.[35]

Mathematics and hyperbolic crochet[edit]
Crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two-dimensionally.[36]

Mathematician Daina Taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong, durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create. These models enable one to turn, fold, and otherwise manipulate space to more fully grasp ideas such as how a line can appear curved in hyperbolic space yet actually be straight. Her work received an exhibition by the Institute For Figuring.[36] A collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes, in imitation of a coral reef.
Examples in nature of organisms that show hyperbolic structures include lettuces, sea slugs, flatworms and coral. Margaret Wertheim and Christine Wertheim of the Institute For Figuring created a travelling art installation of a coral reef using Taimina's method. Local artists are encouraged to create their own "satellite reefs" to be included alongside the original display.[37]
As hyperbolic and mathematics-based crochet has become more popular, there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists. Two shows were Sant Ocean Hall at the Smithsonian in Washington D.C. and Sticks, Hooks, and the Mobius: Knit and Crochet Go Cerebral at Lafayette College in Pennsylvania.[38]

Architecture[edit]
In Style in the technical arts, Gottfried Semper looks at the textile with great promise and historical precedent.[clarification needed] In Section 53, he writes of the "loop stitch, or Noeud Coulant: a knot that, if untied, causes the whole system to unravel." In the same section, Semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more.
There are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture. The following publications, explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture.

Emergent Explorations: Analog and Digital Scripting - Alexander Worden
Research and Design: The Architecture of variation - Lars Spuybroek
YurtAlert - Kate Pokorny
Yarn bombing[edit]
Main article: Yarn bombing
In the past few years, a practice called yarn bombing, or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings, emerged in the US and spread worldwide.[39] Yarn bombers sometimes target existing pieces of graffiti for beautification. In 2010, an entity dubbed "the Midnight Knitter" hit West Cape May. Residents awoke to find knit cozies hugging tree branches and sign poles.[40] In September 2015, Grace Brett was named "The World's Oldest Yarn Bomber". She is part of a group of yarn graffiti-artists called the Souter Stormers, who beautify their local town in Scotland.[41]

Styles in Crochet[edit]
Mosaic Crochet
Granny square
Freeform Crochet
Motifs
Crocheted lace
Tunisian Crochet
Tapestry Crochet
Amigurumi
Filet Crochet
Corner to Corner (C2C) Crochet
See also[edit]
Crochet Guild of America
The Tempestry Project
Fiber art
Macramé
Knitting
References[edit]


^ "crochet". Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ "crochet". Wordreference.com. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ a b "Crochet". The Free Dictionary By Farlex. Retrieved 2012-05-23.

^ Santina M. Levey, Lace: a History, Victoria & Albert Museum, London, 1983, ISBN 090128615X, p. 92

^ Teulet, 'Maison de Marie-Stuart', Relations Politiques, vol. 2 (Paris, 1862), p. 273.

^ Lis Paludan, Crochet: History & Technique, Interweave Press, Loveland CO, ISBN 1883010098, p. 76

^ [1] A. B. Van Meerten, Penélopé, of, Maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd, Amsterdam, 1824, pp. 90–94

^ Sarah Hazell, 200 Crochet Stitches, Search Press, Kent, 2013, ISBN 978-1-84448-963-3

^ [2] Elizabeth Grant, The Memoirs of a Highland Lady, John Murray, London, 1898 p. 182.

^ [3] A. B. Van Meerten, Penélopé, of, Maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd, Amsterdam, 1833, pp. 152

^ [4] Miss Lambert, Hand-book of Needlework, New York City, 1842, p.92

^ [5] Miss Lambert, My Crochet Sampler, London, 1844, pp. 9–10

^ Nancy Nehring, Learn Slip Stitch Crochet, Annie's Attic, Berne IN, 2008, ISBN 1596352159, p. 2

^ [6] Mlle. Riego de la Branchardiere, Knitting, Crochet, and Netting, London, 1846, p.57

^ [7] Mrs. Gaugain, The Lady's Assistant for Executing Useful and Fancy Designs in Knitting, Netting and Crotchet Work, Edinburgh, 1840

^ [8] Jane Gaugain, The Lady's Assistant for Executing Useful and Fancy Designs in Knitting, Netting and Crochet Work, 4th ed., 1847

^ "Crochet | craft". Encyclopedia Britannica.

^ Irish Crochet Lace Exhibit Catalog Archived 2010-06-01 at the Wayback Machine Lacis Museum of Lace and Textiles. 2005.

^ "Crochet History - Crochet Guild of America (CGOA)". www.crochet.org. Archived from the original on 2017-02-02. Retrieved 2017-01-22.

^ Art That Saved the Irish From Starvation by Zelda Bronstein.  Berkeley Daily Planet, April 19, 2005.

^ McFadden, Debbie. "Bettendorf crochet expert is a You Tube star". www.kwqc.com. Retrieved 2022-03-10.

^ "Sac en toile de jute et cabas courses à personnaliser en sérigraphie". artipack.fr.

^ "Right type and size of a Crochet Hook". Knitter’s Pride. Retrieved 18 Oct 2022.

^ Masson, James (1995). Acrylic Fiber Technology and Applications. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc. p. 172. ISBN 0-8247-8977-6.

^ "Crochet Abbreviations Master List". Craft Yarn Council. Retrieved 16 October 2018.

^ "Standards and Guidelines for Crochet and Knitting". Craft Yarn Council. Archived from the original on 2018-04-07. Retrieved 22 October 2021.

^ Hubert, Margaret (2009). Knit Or Crochet - Have It Your Way. Minneapolis, MN: Creative Publishing International, Inc. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-58923-431-4.

^ Brenda GA, Dome-Dweller. "Loom Lore: March 2010". Loomlady.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ "Slip Stitch Crochet « A Yarnified Life". Ayarnifiedlife.wordpress.com. 29 March 2011. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ "Crochet does not use 1/3 more yarn than knitting". Crochetliberationfront.com. 2012-02-20. Archived from the original on 2012-02-24. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ "Southern Belle Lulu pattern by S. Pendleton". Ravelry.

^ "Crochet for Cancer". Crochet for Cancer. Retrieved 9 February 2018.

^ "Soldiers' Angels-Sewing and Crafting Team". Soldiers' Angels. Retrieved 9 February 2018.

^ "Calling all crafters! Here's how you can help wildlife affected by the Australia wildfires". wbir.com. 8 January 2020. Retrieved 2020-10-07.

^ a b c Burack, Cristina (30 January 2022). "Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming". Deutsche Welt. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022.

^ a b "Hyperbolic Space". The Institute for Figuring. December 21, 2006. Retrieved January 15, 2007.

^ "About the Project | Crochet Coral Reef". www.crochetcoralreef.org. Retrieved 2017-10-30.

^ "Sticks, Hooks, and the Mobius: Knit and Crochet Go Cerebral. Math- and science-inspired knit and crochet. · Galleries · Lafayette College". galleries.lafayette.edu. Archived from the original on 11 September 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2022.

^ Anonymous (2009-01-21). "Knitters turn to graffiti artists with 'yarnbombing'". The Telegraph. Retrieved 2009-05-25.

^ "'Midnight Knitter' covers West Cape May trees, lamp poles with yarn". NJ.com. 10 March 2010. Retrieved 5 February 2014.

^ Shah, Yagana (September 25, 2015). "104-Year-Old 'Yarn Bomber' Spreads Her 'Graffiti' All Over Town". HuffPost.


Further reading[edit]

Karen Manthey; Susan Brittain; Julie Armstrong Holetz (2010). Crocheting for Dummies (paperback) (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-470-53645-2.
Hadley, Sara. "Irish Crochet Lace", The Lace Maker, Vol. 4 3, New York: D.S. Bennet, 1911.
Kooler, Donna Donna Kooler's Encyclopedia of Crochet, Leisure Arts, Inc., Little Rock, Arkansas
Lambert, Miss [Frances]. My Crochet Sampler, London: John Murray, Albemarle Street, 1844.
Potter, Annie Louise. A living mystery: the international art & history of crochet
Riego de la Branchardiere, Eléanor. Crochet Book 4th Series, London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Co., 1848.
Riego de la Branchardiere, Eléanor. Crochet Book 6th Series, containing D'Oyleys and Anti-Macassars, London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Co., 1877. This is the 20th printing of this book; the original publishing date is probably about 1850.
Riego de la Branchardiere, Eléanor. Crochet Book, 9th Series or Third Winter Book, London: Simpkin, Marshall and Co., 1850.
Warren, The Court Crochet Doyley Book, London: Ackermann & Co, 1847.
Wildman, Emily. Step-By-Step Crochet, 1972

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Crochet.

The Antique Pattern Library
vteCrochetTools
Crochet hook
Cro-hook
Hook gauge
List of yarns for crochet and knitting
Scissors
Stitch marker
Techniques and motifs
Bead crochet
Blocking
Gauge
Granny square
List of crochet stitches
Shell stitch
Tapestry crochet
Tunisian crochet
Items
Amigurumi
Noken or Bilum
Doily
Crocheted lace
Broomstick lace
Crocheted lace
Filet crochet
Hairpin lace
Irish crochet
Related
Crochet thread
Dye lot
Yarn

vteTextile artsFundamentals
Appliqué
Beadwork
Crochet
Dyeing
Embroidery
Fabric
Felting
Fiber
Knitting
Lace
Macramé
Nålebinding
Needlework
Patchwork
Passementerie
Plying
Quilting
Rope
Rug making
Sewing
Spinning
Stitch
Textile printing
Weaving
Yarn
History of ...
Byzantine silk
Clothing and textiles
Silk
Quilting
Silk in the Indian subcontinent
Textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods
Textiles in the British Industrial Revolution
Timeline of textile technology
Regional and ethnic
African
Andean
Australian Aboriginal
Hmong
Burmese
Acheik
Indonesian
Balinese
Sumba
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Kongo
Korean
Kuba
Māori
Mapuche
Maya
Mexican
Navajo
Oaxacan
Related
Blocking
Fiber art
Mathematics and fiber arts
Manufacturing
Preservation
Recycling
Textile industry
Textile museums
Units of measurement
Wearable fiber art
Glossaries
Dyeing terms
Sewing terms
Textile manufacturing terms
 Clothing portal
vteDecorative arts and handicrafts
History
Textile
Banner-making
Canvas work
Crocheting
Cross-stitch
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving
Paper
Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage
Decoupage
Papier collé
Photomontage
Iris folding
Jianzhi
Kamikiri
Origami
Kirigami
Moneygami
Embossing
Marbling
Papercraft
Papercutting
Chinese
Jewish
Slavic
Papermaking
Paper toys
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper
Wood
Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning
Ceramic
Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta
Glass
Cameo glass
Enamelled glass
Glass etching
Glassware
Stained glass
Chip work
Metal
Chemical milling
Enamel
Engraving
Etching
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith
Bronze and brass ornamental work
Ironwork
Other
Assemblage
Balloon modelling
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Faux painting
Grotesque
Gargoyle
Hardstone carving
Lath art
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic
Glass mosaic
Ornament
Pargeting
Pietra dura
Private press
Pressed flower craft
Qing handicrafts
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal

Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crochet&oldid=1149831025"
Categories: CrochetCraftsFigured fabricsNeedleworkHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from March 2023All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2023Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2022Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles containing video clips






 This page was last edited on 14 April 2023, at 17:57 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement












Crochet - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate Contribute HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title . Search Create accountLog in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more ContributionsTalk Contents move to sidebar hide ( Top ) 1Etymology 2Origins 3Irish crochet 4Modern practice and culture 5Materials Toggle Materials subsection 5 . 1Crochet hook 5 . 2Yarn 6Process 7Types of stitches 8International crochet terms and notations 9Differences from and similarities to knitting 10Charity and activism 11Mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 12 . 1Yarn bombing 12 . 2Styles in Crochet 13See also 14References 15Further reading 16External links Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Crochet 49 languages Afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া CatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisह ि न ् द ी HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaעבריתქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаLatinaLëtzebuergeschLietuviųMagyarमर ा ठ ी မ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ Nederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ PolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதம ி ழ ் TürkçeУкраїнськаاردو中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions ReadEditView history General What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item Print / export Download as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons From Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia Technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookThis article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources : " Crochet " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) For a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae , see Crochet ( insect anatomy ). For the baseball pitcher , see Garrett Crochet . Not to be confused with crotchet . Crochet ( English : / kroʊˈʃeɪ /;[ 1 ] French : [ kʁɔʃɛ ][ 2 ]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn , thread , or strands of other materials .[ 3 ] The name is derived from the French term crochet , meaning ' hook '. Hooks can be made from a variety of materials , such as metal , wood , bamboo , or plastic . The key difference between crochet and knitting , beyond the implements used for their production , is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun , while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time . Some variant forms of crochet , such as Tunisian crochet and broomstick lace , do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time . Demonstration of crochet technique Etymology [ edit ] The word crochet is derived from the French crochet , a diminutive of croche , in turn from the Germanic croc , both meaning " hook ".[ 3 ] It was used in 17th - century French lace - making , where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace . The word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile , and the hooked needle used to produce it .[ 4 ] In 1567 , the tailor of Mary , Queen of Scots , Jehan de Compiegne , supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet , " soye à coudre et crochetz ".[ 5 ] Origins [ edit ] 19th century crochet from Orvieto , Italy Knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century CE , but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in Europe during the 19th century .[ 6 ] Earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding , a different looped yarn technique . A crocheted purse described in 1823 in Penélopé The first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the Dutch magazine Penélopé in 1823 . This includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse , of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread .[ 7 ] The first is " simple open crochet " ( crochet simple ajour ), a mesh of chain - stitch arches . The second ( illustrated here ) starts in a semi - open form ( demi jour ), where chain - stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip - stitch crochet , and closes with a star made with " double - crochet stitches " ( dubbelde hekelsteek : double - crochet in British terminology ; single - crochet in US ).[ 8 ] The third purse is made entirely in double - crochet . The instructions prescribe the use of a tambour needle ( as illustrated below ) and introduce a number of decorative techniques . The earliest dated reference in English to garments made of cloth produced by looping yarn with a hook — shepherd ' s knitting — is in The Memoirs of a Highland Lady by Elizabeth Grant ( 1797 – 1830 ). The journal entry , itself , is dated 1812 but was not recorded in its subsequently published form until some time between 1845 and 1867 , and the actual date of publication was first in 1898 .[ 9 ] Nonetheless , the 1833 volume of Penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd ' s hook , and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn .[ 10 ] In 1844 , one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states : Crochet needles , sometimes called Shepherds ' hooks , are made of steel , ivory , or box - wood . They have a hook at one end similar in shape to a fish - hook , by which the wool or silk is caught and drawn through the work . These instruments are to be procured of various sizes ...[ 11 ] Two years later , the same author writes : Crochet , — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in Scotland , with a small hooked needle called a shepherd ' s hook , — has , within the last seven years , aided by taste and fashion , obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature . It derives its present name from the French ; the instrument with which it is worked being by them , from its crooked shape , termed ' crochet .' This art has attained its highest degree of perfection in England , whence it has been transplanted to France and Germany , and both countries , although unjustifiably , have claimed the invention .[ 12 ] An instruction book from 1846 describes Shepherd or single crochet as what in current British usage is either called single crochet or slip - stitch crochet , with U . S . American terminology always using the latter ( reserving single crochet for use as noted above ).[ 13 ] It similarly equates " Double " and " French crochet ".[ 14 ] Tambour embroidery in the Diderot Encyclopedia Notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely British origin , there is solid evidence of a connection between French tambour embroidery and crochet . French tambour embroidery was illustrated in detail in 1763 in Diderot ' s Encyclopedia . The tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present - day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique . The 1823 Penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms .[ 15 ] This equivalence is retained in the 4th edition of that work , 1847 .[ 16 ] Shepherd ' s hook , 19th - century tapered hook , modern inline hook The strong taper of the shepherd ' s hook eases the production of slip - stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time . Early yarn hooks were also continuously tapered but gradually enough to accommodate multiple loops . The design with a cylindrical shaft that is commonplace today was largely reserved for tambour - style steel needles . Both types gradually merged into the modern form that appeared toward the end of the 19th century , including both tapered and cylindrical segments , and the continuously tapered bone hook remained in industrial production until World War II .[ citation needed ] The early instruction books make frequent reference to the alternative use of ' ivory , bone , or wooden hooks ' and ' steel needles in a handle ', as appropriate to the stitch being made .[ citation needed ] Taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd ' s - and single crochet , and the similar equivalence of French - and double crochet , there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd ' s knitting , leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively ; a distinction that is still made . The locus of the fusion of all these elements — the " invention " noted above — has yet to be determined , as does the origin of shepherd ' s knitting . Shepherd ' s hooks are still being made for local slip - stitch crochet traditions .[ citation needed ] The form in the accompanying photograph is typical for contemporary production . A longer continuously tapering design intermediate between it and the 19th - century tapered hook was also in earlier production , commonly being made from the handles of forks and spoons .[ citation needed ] Irish crochet [ edit ] Detail of a Portuguese crocheted tablecloth , about 1970 Irish crochet lace , late 19th century . The design of this example is closely based on Flemish needle lace of the 17th century . In the 19th century , as Ireland was facing the Great Irish Famine ( 1845 – 1849 ), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief [ 17 ] ( the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished Irish workers ).[ 18 ] Men , women , children joined a co - operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the Great Irish Famine . Schools to teach crocheting were started . Teachers were trained and sent across Ireland to teach this craft . When the Irish immigrated to the Americas , they were able to take with them crocheting .[ 19 ] Mademoiselle Riego de la Branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of Irish Crochet , publishing the first book of patterns in 1846 . Irish lace became popular in Europe and America , and was made in quantity until the first World War .[ 20 ] Modern practice and culture [ edit ] Fashions in crochet changed with the end of the Victorian era in the 1890s . Crocheted laces in the new Edwardian era , peaking between 1910 and 1920 , became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching .[ citation needed ] Filet crochet by an internee at Manzanar War Relocation Center , 1943 . Photograph by Ansel Adams The strong Victorian colours disappeared , though , and new publications called for white or pale threads , except for fancy purses , which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded . After World War I , far fewer crochet patterns were published , and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th - century patterns .[ citation needed ] After World War II , from the late 1940s until the early 1960s , there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts , particularly in the United States , with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies , potholders , and other home items , along with updates of earlier publications . These patterns called for thicker threads and yarns than in earlier patterns and included variegated colors . The craft remained primarily a homemaker ' s art until the late 1960s and early 1970s , when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares , a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors . Detail on gold thread crochet in a mid - 20th century short jacket designed by Sybil Connolly Although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity , the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and DIY , as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn . As well as books and classes , there are YouTube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet .[ 21 ] Filet crochet , Tunisian crochet , tapestry crochet , broomstick lace , hairpin lace , cro - hooking , and Irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method . Bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in Guatemala . Crochet table decor , Kolkata , West Bengal , India Crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well . Christopher Kane ' s Fall 2011 Ready - to - Wear collection [ 22 ] makes intensive use of the granny square , one of the most basic of crochet motifs . In addition , crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show Project Runway .[ citation needed ] Websites such as Etsy and Ravelry have made it easier for individual hobbyists to sell and distribute their patterns or projects across the internet . Materials [ edit ] Basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted , most commonly yarn or thread . Yarn , one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting , has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns . Acrylic can also be used when crocheting , as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool . Additional tools are convenient for making related accessories . Examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts , which can be used to make tassels , fringe , and many other items ; a pom - pom circle , used to make pom - poms ; a tape measure and a gauge measure , both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches ; a row counter ; and occasionally plastic rings , which are used for special projects . In recent years , yarn selections have moved beyond synthetic and plant and animal - based fibers to include bamboo , qiviut , hemp , and banana stalks , to name a few . Many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to " go green " and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags , old t - shirts or sheets , VCR or Cassette tape , and ribbon .[ citation needed ] Crochet hook [ edit ] Aluminium crochet hooks Main article : Crochet hook The crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials , such as bone , bamboo , aluminium , plastic , and steel .[ 23 ] Because sizing is categorized by the diameter of the hook ' s shaft , a crafter aims to create stitches of a certain size in order to reach a particular gauge specified in a given pattern . If gauge is not reached with one hook , another is used until the stitches made are the needed size . Crafters may have a preference for one type of hook material over another due to aesthetic appeal , yarn glide , or hand disorders such as arthritis , where bamboo or wood hooks are favored over metal for the perceived warmth and flexibility during use . Hook grips and ergonomic hook handles are also available to assist crafters . Steel crochet hooks range in size from 0 . 4 to 3 . 5 millimeters , or from 00 to 16 in American sizing . These hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace . Aluminium , bamboo , and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2 . 5 to 19 millimeters in size , or from B to S in American sizing .[ citation needed ] Artisan - made hooks are often made of hand - turned woods , sometimes decorated with semi - precious stones or beads . Crochet hooks used for Tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle , while double - ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle . There is also a double hooked apparatus called a Cro - hook that has become popular .[ citation needed ] A hairpin loom is often used to create lacy and long stitches , known as hairpin lace . While this is not in itself a hook , it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches . See : List of United States standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes Yarn [ edit ] Main article : Yarn A hank of wool yarn ( center ) is uncoiled into its basic loop . A tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting . Crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls . Yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls , or skeins ( hanks ), although it may also be wound on spools or cones . Skeins and balls are generally sold with a yarn band , a label that describes the yarn ' s weight , length , dye lot , fiber content , washing instructions , suggested needle size , likely gauge , etc . It is a common practice to save the yarn band for future reference , especially if additional skeins must be purchased . Crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot . The dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color ; skeins from different dye lots , even if very similar in color , are usually slightly different and may produce a visible stripe when added onto existing work . If insufficient yarn of a single dye lot is bought to complete a project , additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online . The thickness or weight of the yarn is a significant factor in determining how many stitches and rows are required to cover a given area for a given stitch pattern . This is also termed the gauge . Thicker yarns generally require large - diameter crochet hooks , whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks . Hence , thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches , and therefore less time , to work up a given project . The recommended gauge for a given ball of yarn can be found on the label that surrounds the skein when buying in stores . Patterns and motifs are coarser with thicker yarns and produce bold visual effects , whereas thinner yarns are best for refined or delicate pattern - work . Yarns are standardly grouped by thickness into six categories : superfine , fine , light , medium , bulky and superbulky . Quantitatively , thickness is measured by the number of wraps per inch ( WPI ). The related weight per unit length is usually measured in tex or denier . Transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn ( top ) into a ball in which the yarn emerges from the center ( bottom ). Using the latter is better for needlework , since the yarn is much less likely to tangle . Before use , hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center , making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled . The winding process may be performed by hand or done with a ball winder and swift .[ citation needed ] A yarn ' s usefulness is judged by several factors , such as its loft ( its ability to trap air ), its resilience ( elasticity under tension ), its washability and colorfastness , its hand ( its feel , particularly softness vs . scratchiness ), its durability against abrasion , its resistance to pilling , its hairiness ( fuzziness ), its tendency to twist or untwist , its overall weight and drape , its blocking and felting qualities , its comfort ( breathability , moisture absorption , wicking properties ) and its appearance , which includes its color , sheen , smoothness and ornamental features . Other factors include allergenicity , speed of drying , resistance to chemicals , moths , and mildew , melting point and flammability , retention of static electricity , and the propensity to accept dyes . Desirable properties may vary for different projects , so there is no one " best " yarn . The two possible twists of yarn Although crochet may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers . In spinning , the fibers are twisted so that the yarn resists breaking under tension ; the twisting may be done in either direction , resulting in a Z - twist or S - twist yarn . If the fibers are first aligned by combing them and the spinner uses a worsted type drafting method such as the short forward draw , the yarn is smoother and called a worsted ; by contrast , if the fibers are carded but not combed and the spinner uses a woolen drafting method such as the long backward draw , the yarn is fuzzier and called woolen - spun . The fibers making up a yarn may be continuous filament fibers such as silk and many synthetics , or they may be staples ( fibers of an average length , typically a few inches ); naturally filament fibers are sometimes cut up into staples before spinning . The strength of the spun yarn against breaking is determined by the amount of twist , the length of the fibers and the thickness of the yarn . In general , yarns become stronger with more twist ( also called worst ), longer fibers and thicker yarns ( more fibers ); for example , thinner yarns require more twist than do thicker yarns to resist breaking under tension . The thickness of the yarn may vary along its length ; a slub is a much thicker section in which a mass of fibers is incorporated into the yarn .[ citation needed ] The spun fibers are generally divided into animal fibers , plant and synthetic fibers . These fiber types are chemically different , corresponding to proteins , carbohydrates and synthetic polymers , respectively . Animal fibers include silk , but generally are long hairs of animals such as sheep ( wool ), goat ( angora , or cashmere goat ), rabbit ( angora ), llama , alpaca , dog , cat , camel , yak , and muskox ( qiviut ). Plants used for fibers include cotton , flax ( for linen ), bamboo , ramie , hemp , jute , nettle , raffia , yucca , coconut husk , banana trees , soy and corn . Rayon and acetate fibers are also produced from cellulose mainly derived from trees . Common synthetic fibers include acrylics ,[ 24 ] polyesters such as dacron and ingeo , nylon and other polyamides , and olefins such as polypropylene . Of these types , wool is generally favored for crochet , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting ; however , wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it . It is also common to blend different fibers in the yarn , e . g ., 85 % alpaca and 15 % silk . Even within a type of fiber , there can be great variety in the length and thickness of the fibers ; for example , Merino wool and Egyptian cotton are favored because they produce exceptionally long , thin ( fine ) fibers for their type .[ citation needed ] A single spun yarn may be crochet as is , or braided or plied with another . In plying , two or more yarns are spun together , almost always in the opposite sense from which they were spun individually ; for example , two Z - twist yarns are usually plied with an S - twist . The opposing twist relieves some of the yarns ' tendency to curl up and produces a thicker , balanced yarn . Plied yarns may themselves be plied together , producing cabled yarns or multi - stranded yarns . Sometimes , the yarns being plied are fed at different rates , so that one yarn loops around the other , as in bouclé . The single yarns may be dyed separately before plying , or afterwards to give the yarn a uniform look .[ citation needed ] The dyeing of yarns is a complex art . Yarns need not be dyed ; or they may be dyed one color , or a great variety of colors . Dyeing may be done industrially , by hand or even hand - painted onto the yarn . A great variety of synthetic dyes have been developed since the synthesis of indigo dye in the mid - 19th century ; however , natural dyes are also possible , although they are generally less brilliant . The color - scheme of a yarn is sometimes called its colorway . Variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects , such as diagonal stripes .[ citation needed ] Process [ edit ] A close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace - weight mohair yarn . Crochet tablecloth , Kolkata , West Bengal , India Crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip - knot loop on the hook ( though other methods , such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used ), pulling another loop through the first loop , and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length . The chain is either turned and worked in rows , or joined to the beginning of the row with a slip stitch and worked in rounds . Rounds can also be created by working many stitches into a single loop . Stitches are made by pulling one or more loops through each loop of the chain . At any one time at the end of a stitch , there is only one loop left on the hook . Tunisian crochet , however , draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time . Like knitting , crochet can be worked either flat ( back and forth in rows ) or in the round ( in spirals , such as when making tubular pieces ).[ citation needed ] Types of stitches [ edit ] Indian Crochet white tablecloth about 1970 . There are six main types of basic stitches ( the following description uses US crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the UK and Europe ). Chain stitch – the most basic of all stitches and used to begin most projects . Slip stitch – used to join chain stitch to form a ring . Single crochet stitch ( called double crochet stitch in the UK ) – easiest stitch to master Half - double crochet stitch ( called half treble stitch in the UK ) – the ' in - between ' stitch , sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications Double crochet stitch ( called treble stitch in the UK ) ( yarn over once ) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch Treble ( or triple ) crochet stitch ( called double treble stitch in the UK ) ( yarn over twice ) While the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same , they differ in height and thickness .[ citation needed ] The more advanced stitches are often combinations of these basic stitches , or are made by inserting the hook into the work in unusual locations . More advanced stitches include the shell stitch , V stitch , spike stitch , Afghan stitch , butterfly stitch , popcorn stitch , cluster stitch , and crocodile stitch . International crochet terms and notations [ edit ] Main article : List of crochet stitches Some crochet symbols , abbreviations , and US / UK terms In the English - speaking crochet world , basic stitches have different names that vary by country . The differences are usually referred to as UK / US or British / American . Crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations .[ 25 ] To help counter confusion when reading patterns , a diagramming system using a standard international notation has come into use ( illustration , left ). In the United States , crochet terminology and sizing guidelines , as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling , are primarily regulated by the Craft Yarn Council .[ 26 ] Another terminological difference is known as tension ( UK ) and gauge ( US ). Individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and , if unmeasured , these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches . In order to control for this inconsistency , printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric . An individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook . North Americans call this gauge , referring to the result of these adjustments ; British crocheters speak of tension , which refers to the crafter ' s grip on the yarn while producing stitches .[ citation needed ] Differences from and similarities to knitting [ edit ] One of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles . In most crochet , the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook ( with the exception being Tunisian crochet ), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously . Dropped stitches , which can unravel a knitted fabric , rarely interfere with crochet work , due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet . In knitting , each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below , whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it . If a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks , the stitches above and below remain intact , and because of the complex looping of each stitch , the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed .[ citation needed ] Round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook , but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double - ended needles . Many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined , either by sewing or crocheting , whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric , such as entrelac .[ citation needed ] Freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece . It is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires . Knitting can be accomplished by machine , while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand . The height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different : a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools , and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch .[ 27 ] While most crochet is made with a hook , there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom . This is called loomchet .[ 28 ] Slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting . Each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off . A person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits , purls , and cables , and get a similar result .[ 29 ] It is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting , tends to have less " give " than knitted fabric , and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items . Although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch , both made with the same size yarn and needle / hook , it is not necessarily true for crochet in general . Most crochet uses far less than 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces , and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn . Tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces . According to sources [ 30 ] claiming to have tested the 1 / 3 more yarn assertion , a single crochet stitch ( sc ) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch , but more yarn than stockinette stitch . Any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric . Cluster stitches , which are in fact multiple stitches worked together , will use the most length .[ citation needed ] Standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric , more like knit garter stitch . This is part of why they use more yarn . Slip stitch can produce a fabric much like stockinette that is thinner and therefore uses less yarn . Any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted , provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used , but the cord ' s properties should be taken into account . For example , lofty , thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted , which does not crush their airy structure , while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for Amigurumi crochet .[ 31 ] Differences between crochet and knitting Most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time . Crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools , as shown here . Knitting uses two or more straight needles that carry multiple stitches . Unlike crochet , knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds . Charity and activism [ edit ] It has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war . People have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals , for sick patients and also for newborn babies . Sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose , such as crocheting for homeless shelters , nursing homes , etc . It is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats ( commonly referred to as " chemo caps ") and donate them to cancer treatment centers , for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair . During October pink hats and scarves are made and proceeds are donated to breast cancer funds . Organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include Knots of Love , Crochet for Cancer ,[ 32 ] and Soldiers ' Angels .[ 33 ] These organizations offer warm useful items for people in need . In 2020 , people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the Australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches , koala mittens and wildlife nests .[ 34 ] This was an international effort to help during the particularly bad bushfire season which devastated local ecological systems . A group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20 , 000 contributors in what became the Crochet Coral Reef Project .[ 35 ] To promote awareness of the effects of global warming , their creations have been displayed in galleries and museums by an estimated 2 million people .[ 35 ] Many creations apply hyperbolic ( curved ) geometric shapes — distinguished from Euclidean ( flat ) geometry — to emulate natural structures .[ 35 ] Mathematics and hyperbolic crochet [ edit ] Crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two - dimensionally .[ 36 ] Mathematician Daina Taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong , durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create . These models enable one to turn , fold , and otherwise manipulate space to more fully grasp ideas such as how a line can appear curved in hyperbolic space yet actually be straight . Her work received an exhibition by the Institute For Figuring .[ 36 ] A collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes , in imitation of a coral reef . Examples in nature of organisms that show hyperbolic structures include lettuces , sea slugs , flatworms and coral . Margaret Wertheim and Christine Wertheim of the Institute For Figuring created a travelling art installation of a coral reef using Taimina ' s method . Local artists are encouraged to create their own " satellite reefs " to be included alongside the original display .[ 37 ] As hyperbolic and mathematics - based crochet has become more popular , there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists . Two shows were Sant Ocean Hall at the Smithsonian in Washington D . C . and Sticks , Hooks , and the Mobius : Knit and Crochet Go Cerebral at Lafayette College in Pennsylvania .[ 38 ] Architecture [ edit ] In Style in the technical arts , Gottfried Semper looks at the textile with great promise and historical precedent .[ clarification needed ] In Section 53 , he writes of the " loop stitch , or Noeud Coulant : a knot that , if untied , causes the whole system to unravel ." In the same section , Semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more . There are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture . The following publications , explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture . Emergent Explorations : Analog and Digital Scripting - Alexander Worden Research and Design : The Architecture of variation - Lars Spuybroek YurtAlert - Kate Pokorny Yarn bombing [ edit ] Main article : Yarn bombing In the past few years , a practice called yarn bombing , or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings , emerged in the US and spread worldwide .[ 39 ] Yarn bombers sometimes target existing pieces of graffiti for beautification . In 2010 , an entity dubbed " the Midnight Knitter " hit West Cape May . Residents awoke to find knit cozies hugging tree branches and sign poles .[ 40 ] In September 2015 , Grace Brett was named " The World ' s Oldest Yarn Bomber ". She is part of a group of yarn graffiti - artists called the Souter Stormers , who beautify their local town in Scotland .[ 41 ] Styles in Crochet [ edit ] Mosaic Crochet Granny square Freeform Crochet Motifs Crocheted lace Tunisian Crochet Tapestry Crochet Amigurumi Filet Crochet Corner to Corner ( C2C ) Crochet See also [ edit ] Crochet Guild of America The Tempestry Project Fiber art Macramé Knitting References [ edit ] ^ " crochet ". Dictionary . reference . com . Retrieved 2012 - 04 - 28 . ^ " crochet ". Wordreference . com . Retrieved 2012 - 04 - 28 . ^ a b " Crochet ". The Free Dictionary By Farlex . Retrieved 2012 - 05 - 23 . ^ Santina M . Levey , Lace : a History , Victoria & Albert Museum , London , 1983 , ISBN 090128615X , p . 92 ^ Teulet , ' Maison de Marie - Stuart ', Relations Politiques , vol . 2 ( Paris , 1862 ), p . 273 . ^ Lis Paludan , Crochet : History & Technique , Interweave Press , Loveland CO , ISBN 1883010098 , p . 76 ^ [ 1 ] A . B . Van Meerten , Penélopé , of , Maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd , Amsterdam , 1824 , pp . 90 – 94 ^ Sarah Hazell , 200 Crochet Stitches , Search Press , Kent , 2013 , ISBN 978 - 1 - 84448 - 963 - 3 ^ [ 2 ] Elizabeth Grant , The Memoirs of a Highland Lady , John Murray , London , 1898 p . 182 . ^ [ 3 ] A . B . Van Meerten , Penélopé , of , Maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd , Amsterdam , 1833 , pp . 152 ^ [ 4 ] Miss Lambert , Hand - book of Needlework , New York City , 1842 , p . 92 ^ [ 5 ] Miss Lambert , My Crochet Sampler , London , 1844 , pp . 9 – 10 ^ Nancy Nehring , Learn Slip Stitch Crochet , Annie ' s Attic , Berne IN , 2008 , ISBN 1596352159 , p . 2 ^ [ 6 ] Mlle . Riego de la Branchardiere , Knitting , Crochet , and Netting , London , 1846 , p . 57 ^ [ 7 ] Mrs . Gaugain , The Lady ' s Assistant for Executing Useful and Fancy Designs in Knitting , Netting and Crotchet Work , Edinburgh , 1840 ^ [ 8 ] Jane Gaugain , The Lady ' s Assistant for Executing Useful and Fancy Designs in Knitting , Netting and Crochet Work , 4th ed ., 1847 ^ " Crochet | craft ". Encyclopedia Britannica . ^ Irish Crochet Lace Exhibit Catalog Archived 2010 - 06 - 01 at the Wayback Machine Lacis Museum of Lace and Textiles . 2005 . ^ " Crochet History - Crochet Guild of America ( CGOA )". www . crochet . org . Archived from the original on 2017 - 02 - 02 . Retrieved 2017 - 01 - 22 . ^ Art That Saved the Irish From Starvation by Zelda Bronstein . Berkeley Daily Planet , April 19 , 2005 . ^ McFadden , Debbie . " Bettendorf crochet expert is a You Tube star ". www . kwqc . com . Retrieved 2022 - 03 - 10 . ^ " Sac en toile de jute et cabas courses à personnaliser en sérigraphie ". artipack . fr . ^ " Right type and size of a Crochet Hook ". Knitter ’ s Pride . Retrieved 18 Oct 2022 . ^ Masson , James ( 1995 ). Acrylic Fiber Technology and Applications . New York : Marcel Dekker , Inc . p . 172 . ISBN 0 - 8247 - 8977 - 6 . ^ " Crochet Abbreviations Master List ". Craft Yarn Council . Retrieved 16 October 2018 . ^ " Standards and Guidelines for Crochet and Knitting ". Craft Yarn Council . Archived from the original on 2018 - 04 - 07 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . ^ Hubert , Margaret ( 2009 ). Knit Or Crochet - Have It Your Way . Minneapolis , MN : Creative Publishing International , Inc . p . 6 . ISBN 978 - 1 - 58923 - 431 - 4 . ^ Brenda GA , Dome - Dweller . " Loom Lore : March 2010 ". Loomlady . blogspot . com . Retrieved 2012 - 04 - 28 . ^ " Slip Stitch Crochet « A Yarnified Life ". Ayarnifiedlife . wordpress . com . 29 March 2011 . Retrieved 2012 - 04 - 28 . ^ " Crochet does not use 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting ". Crochetliberationfront . com . 2012 - 02 - 20 . Archived from the original on 2012 - 02 - 24 . Retrieved 2012 - 04 - 28 . ^ " Southern Belle Lulu pattern by S . Pendleton ". Ravelry . ^ " Crochet for Cancer ". Crochet for Cancer . Retrieved 9 February 2018 . ^ " Soldiers ' Angels - Sewing and Crafting Team ". Soldiers ' Angels . Retrieved 9 February 2018 . ^ " Calling all crafters ! Here ' s how you can help wildlife affected by the Australia wildfires ". wbir . com . 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 2020 - 10 - 07 . ^ a b c Burack , Cristina ( 30 January 2022 ). " Crocheted ocean art to fight global warming ". Deutsche Welt . Archived from the original on 31 January 2022 . ^ a b " Hyperbolic Space ". The Institute for Figuring . December 21 , 2006 . Retrieved January 15 , 2007 . ^ " About the Project | Crochet Coral Reef ". www . crochetcoralreef . org . Retrieved 2017 - 10 - 30 . ^ " Sticks , Hooks , and the Mobius : Knit and Crochet Go Cerebral . Math - and science - inspired knit and crochet . · Galleries · Lafayette College ". galleries . lafayette . edu . Archived from the original on 11 September 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 . ^ Anonymous ( 2009 - 01 - 21 ). " Knitters turn to graffiti artists with ' yarnbombing '". The Telegraph . Retrieved 2009 - 05 - 25 . ^ "' Midnight Knitter ' covers West Cape May trees , lamp poles with yarn ". NJ . com . 10 March 2010 . Retrieved 5 February 2014 . ^ Shah , Yagana ( September 25 , 2015 ). " 104 - Year - Old ' Yarn Bomber ' Spreads Her ' Graffiti ' All Over Town ". HuffPost . Further reading [ edit ] Karen Manthey ; Susan Brittain ; Julie Armstrong Holetz ( 2010 ). Crocheting for Dummies ( paperback ) ( 2nd ed .). Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . ISBN 978 - 0 - 470 - 53645 - 2 . Hadley , Sara . " Irish Crochet Lace ", The Lace Maker , Vol . 4 3 , New York : D . S . Bennet , 1911 . Kooler , Donna Donna Kooler ' s Encyclopedia of Crochet , Leisure Arts , Inc ., Little Rock , Arkansas Lambert , Miss [ Frances ]. My Crochet Sampler , London : John Murray , Albemarle Street , 1844 . Potter , Annie Louise . A living mystery : the international art & history of crochet Riego de la Branchardiere , Eléanor . Crochet Book 4th Series , London : Simpkin , Marshall , and Co ., 1848 . Riego de la Branchardiere , Eléanor . Crochet Book 6th Series , containing D ' Oyleys and Anti - Macassars , London : Simpkin , Marshall , and Co ., 1877 . This is the 20th printing of this book ; the original publishing date is probably about 1850 . Riego de la Branchardiere , Eléanor . Crochet Book , 9th Series or Third Winter Book , London : Simpkin , Marshall and Co ., 1850 . Warren , The Court Crochet Doyley Book , London : Ackermann & Co , 1847 . Wildman , Emily . Step - By - Step Crochet , 1972 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Crochet . The Antique Pattern Library vteCrochetTools Crochet hook Cro - hook Hook gauge List of yarns for crochet and knitting Scissors Stitch marker Techniques and motifs Bead crochet Blocking Gauge Granny square List of crochet stitches Shell stitch Tapestry crochet Tunisian crochet Items Amigurumi Noken or Bilum Doily Crocheted lace Broomstick lace Crocheted lace Filet crochet Hairpin lace Irish crochet Related Crochet thread Dye lot Yarn vteTextile artsFundamentals Appliqué Beadwork Crochet Dyeing Embroidery Fabric Felting Fiber Knitting Lace Macramé Nålebinding Needlework Patchwork Passementerie Plying Quilting Rope Rug making Sewing Spinning Stitch Textile printing Weaving Yarn History of ... Byzantine silk Clothing and textiles Silk Quilting Silk in the Indian subcontinent Textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods Textiles in the British Industrial Revolution Timeline of textile technology Regional and ethnic African Andean Australian Aboriginal Hmong Burmese Acheik Indonesian Balinese Sumba Indigenous peoples of the Americas Kongo Korean Kuba Māori Mapuche Maya Mexican Navajo Oaxacan Related Blocking Fiber art Mathematics and fiber arts Manufacturing Preservation Recycling Textile industry Textile museums Units of measurement Wearable fiber art Glossaries Dyeing terms Sewing terms Textile manufacturing terms Clothing portal vteDecorative arts and handicrafts History Textile Banner - making Canvas work Crocheting Cross - stitch Embroidery Felting Friendship bracelet Knitting Lace - making Lucet Macrame Millinery Needlepoint Needlework Patchwork Quilting Ribbon embroidery Rug hooking Rug making Sewing Shoemaking Spinning ( textiles ) String art Tapestry Tatting Tie - dye Weaving Paper Altered book Bookbinding Calligraphy Cardmaking Cast paper Collage Decoupage Papier collé Photomontage Iris folding Jianzhi Kamikiri Origami Kirigami Moneygami Embossing Marbling Papercraft Papercutting Chinese Jewish Slavic Papermaking Paper toys Papier - mâché Pop - up book Quilling Scrapbooking Stamping Wallpaper Wood Bentwood Cabinetry Carpentry Chip carving Ébéniste Fretwork Intarsia Marquetry Wood burning Wood carving Woodturning Ceramic Azulejo Bone china Earthenware Porcelain Pottery Stoneware Terracotta Glass Cameo glass Enamelled glass Glass etching Glassware Stained glass Chip work Metal Chemical milling Enamel Engraving Etching Jewellery Goldsmith Silversmith Bronze and brass ornamental work Ironwork Other Assemblage Balloon modelling Beadwork Bone carving Doll making Dollhouse Egg decorating Engraved gems Faux painting Grotesque Gargoyle Hardstone carving Lath art Lapidary Leatherworking Miniatures Micromosaic Mosaic Glass mosaic Ornament Pargeting Pietra dura Private press Pressed flower craft Qing handicrafts Scrimshaw Straw marquetry Wall decal Authority control : National France BnF data Germany Israel United States Czech Republic Retrieved from " https :// en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Crochet & oldid = 1149831025 " Categories : CrochetCraftsFigured fabricsNeedleworkHidden categories : Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from March 2023All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2023Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2022Commons category link is on WikidataArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with GND identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles containing video clips This page was last edited on 14 April 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( UTC ). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution - ShareAlike License 3 . 0 ; additional terms may apply . By using this site , you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia ® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation , Inc ., a non - profit organization . Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement