^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

there are people in england and the united states who do not knit english (also called american) style, and there are plenty of people in continental europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non-dominant hand, as is done in continental knitting.

english knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand, alongside the working needle.

continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non-dominant hand.

because this style holds the yarn in the non-dominant hand, there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling.

instead, the yarn is either placed above or below the needle in the non-dominant hand.

this particular hold puts the working yarn in the non-dominant hand, which makes it a variant of continental; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style.

the only distinction with russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non-dominant hand, very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg.

this style is similar to lever knitting (see below) with the yarn in the non-dominant hand.

lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely, creating a sort of back-and-forth levering motion.

because the dominant hand doesn't have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time, this style of knitting is much faster.

there are people in england and the united states who do not knit english ( also called american ) style , and there are plenty of people in continental europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non - dominant hand , as is done in continental knitting .

english knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand , alongside the working needle .

continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non - dominant hand .

because this style holds the yarn in the non - dominant hand , there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling .

instead , the yarn is either placed above or below the needle in the non - dominant hand .

this particular hold puts the working yarn in the non - dominant hand , which makes it a variant of continental ; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style .

the only distinction with russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non - dominant hand , very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg .

this style is similar to lever knitting ( see below ) with the yarn in the non - dominant hand .

lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely , creating a sort of back - and - forth levering motion .

because the dominant hand doesn ' t have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time , this style of knitting is much faster .

