knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1structure toggle structure subsection 1.1courses and wales 1.2weft and warp knitting[3] 1.3knit and purl stitches 1.4differences between knitting and crocheting 1.5right- and left-plaited stitches 1.6edges and joins between fabrics 1.7cables, increases, and lace 1.8ornamentations and additions 2history and culture 3properties of fabrics toggle properties of fabrics subsection 3.1texture 3.2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1yarn 5.2metal wire 5.3glass and wax 6tools toggle tools subsection 6.1needles 6.1.1largest circular knitting needles 6.1.2record 6.2ancillary tools 7knitting styles/holds toggle knitting styles/holds subsection 7.1continental/german style 7.1.1norwegian style 7.1.2russian style 7.2english style 7.3portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8.1armenian 8.2double knitting 8.3fair isle 8.4mega knitting 8.5micro knitting 8.6short row 8.6.1wrap and turn 8.6.2german short row 8.6.3japanese short row 8.7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাбашҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어हिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn "knit" redirects here.

for other uses, see knitting (disambiguation).

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "knitting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (december 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches: knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns.

knitting may be done by hand or by machine.

knitting creates stitches: loops of yarn in a row, either flat or in the round (tubular).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time.

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows.

differences in yarn (varying in fibre type, weight, uniformity and twist), needle size, and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties, including color, texture, thickness, heat retention, water resistance, and integrity.

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch.

structure[edit] courses and wales[edit] structure of stockinette stitch, a common weave in knitted fabric.

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches.

like weaving, knitting is a technique for producing a two-dimensional fabric made from a one-dimensional yarn or thread.

by contrast, the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path (a course), forming symmetric loops (also called bights) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn.

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics.

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%.

for this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer's motions, such as socks and hosiery.

knitted garments are often more form-fitting than woven garments, since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body's outline more closely; by contrast, curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts, flares, gussets and gores, the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further.

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc.

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting, which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric.

if they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled; this is known as ripping out, unravelling knitting, or humorously, frogging (because you 'rip it', this sounds like a frog croaking: 'rib-bit').

[2] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric, a method for casting on is used; to secure the final stitches in a wale, one uses a method of binding/casting off.

during knitting, the active stitches are secured mechanically, either from individual hooks (in knitting machines) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand-knitting.

basic pattern of warp knitting.

weft and warp knitting[3][edit] see also: warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting.

[4] in the more common weft knitting, the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn.

in warp knitting, the wales and courses run roughly parallel.

in weft knitting, the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn, by adding stitches to each wale in turn, moving across the fabric as in a raster scan.

by contrast, in warp knitting, one yarn is required for every wale.

[3] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales, warp knitting is typically done by machine, whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine.

[5] warp-knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs, and are commonly used in lingerie.

[6] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft-knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns, usually to produce interesting color patterns.

in intarsia, the yarns are used in well-segregated regions, e.g., a red apple on a field of green; in that case, the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time.

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously (e.g., two socks).

in the knit stitch on the left, the next (red) loop passes through the previous (yellow) loop from below, whereas in the purl stitch (right), the next stitch enters from above.

thus, a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other, and vice versa.

knit and purl stitches[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types.

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row; this produces 'stockinette' stitch.

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit, consistent with 'garter' stitch.

if the former, the stitch is denoted as a 'knit stitch' or a 'plain stitch;' if the latter, as a 'purl stitch'.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side.

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect; the knit stitches look like 'v's stacked vertically, whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric.

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as "pixels"; however, such pixels are usually rectangular, rather than square, depending on the gauge/tension of the knitting.

individual stitches, or rows of stitches, may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop (an elongated stitch), which is the basis for uneven knitting: a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect.

in the simplest of hand-knitted fabrics, every row of stitches are all knit (or all purl); this creates a garter stitch fabric.

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern/stocking stitch.

vertical stripes (ribbing) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches.

for example, a common choice is 2x2 ribbing, in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches, etc.

horizontal striping (welting) is also possible, by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches.

checkerboard patterns (basketweave) are also possible, the smallest of which is known as seed/moss stitch: the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row.

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row, such as in stockinette/stocking stitch, have a tendency to curl—top and bottom curl toward the front (or knitted side) while the sides curl toward the back (or purled side); by contrast, those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically (such as ribbing, garter stitch or seed/moss stitch) have more texture and tend to lie flat.

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede, whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward, giving the fabric more stretchability.

thus, the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible, since the neighboring knit wales come forward.

conversely, rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches.

this is the basis of shadow knitting, in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions.

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted, dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric, e.g., the lower leaves of a flower.

the merged stitches need not be from the same row; for example, a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows, producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric.

not every stitch in a row need be knitted; some may be 'missed' (unknitted and passed to the active needle) and knitted on a subsequent row.

this is known as slip-stitch knitting.

[8] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones.

for example, a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts.

mosaic knitting is a form of slip-stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns; mosaic-knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair-isle knitting.

this is known as drop-stitch knitting, and produces a vertical ladder of see-through holes in the fabric, corresponding to where the wale had been.

differences between knitting and crocheting[edit] for many beginners, telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky.

[clarification needed] when knitting, the stitches form a shape that is similar to a "v", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together.

when knitting, a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles.

often times, crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting.

right- and left-plaited stitches[edit] see also: plaited stitch (knitting) the stitches on the right are right-plaited, whereas the stitches on the left are left-plaited.

within limits, an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches, whether they be knit or purl.

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted: usually once if at all, but sometimes twice and (very rarely) thrice.

hand-knitters generally produce right-plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops, i.e., passing the needle through the initial stitch in an unusual way, but wrapping the yarn as usual.

by contrast, the left-plaited stitch is generally formed by hand-knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way, rather than by any change in the needle.

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire.

edges and joins between fabrics[edit] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast-on and bound/cast-off edges.

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric, e.g., for button holes, by binding/casting off and re-casting on again (horizontal) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately.

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery-based grafting methods, most commonly the kitchener stitch.

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac, in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern.

illustration of cable knitting.

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches.

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit, the wales can be made to cross.

cables, increases, and lace[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches ordinarily, stitches are knitted in the same order in every row, and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric.

however, this need not be so, since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another, forming a cable pattern.

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together, making it denser and less elastic;[10] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling.

[11] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting, with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric.

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale, such as appear in celtic knots, but these are inexact approximations.

however, such circular wales are possible using swiss darning, a form of embroidery, or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric.

in lace knitting, the pattern is formed by making small, stable holes in the fabric, generally with yarn overs.

this is used to great effect in lace knitting, which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes, rather than with the stitches themselves.

[12] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic; for example, some shetland "wedding-ring" shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring.

by combining increases and decreases, it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical, even in weft knitting.

this is the basis for bias knitting, and can be used for visual effect, similar to the direction of a brush-stroke in oil painting.

ornamentations and additions[edit] various point-like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric.

long loops can also be drawn out and secured, forming a "shaggy" texture to the fabric; this is known as loop knitting.

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery; if the embroidery resembles knitting, it is often called swiss darning.

various closures for the garments, such as frogs and buttons can be added; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment, rather than cut.

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique.

for example, differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture.

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit.

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth, as is done in tufting and "weaving" (also known as "couching").

history and culture[edit] main article: history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan, to knot.

[13] the exact origins of knitting are unknown, the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat, now part of cairo.

[14] nålebinding (danish: literally "binding with a needle" or "needle-binding") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet.

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century (tournai in 1429, barcelona in 1496).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization (not necessarily a guild) of knitters from 1268.

[15] the occupation: "cap knitter" describes margaret yeo, of london, in 1473.

[16] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame, an early form of knitting machine, knitting "by hand" became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber.

similar to quilting, spinning, and needlepoint, hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy.

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop, richard rutt, authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting (batsford, 1987).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art (university of southampton).

properties of fabrics[edit] main article: knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch, the most basic weft-knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex.

unlike woven fabrics, where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically, yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row, as with the red strand in the diagram at left, in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it.

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern, a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions.

many modern stretchy garments, even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch, also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns.

close-up of front of stockinette stitch close-up of back of stockinette stitch, also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric (as in the diagram, and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern) has a definite "right side" and "wrong side".

stitches can be worked from either side, and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the "wrong side" stitches, known as purl stitches, either in columns (ribbing), rows (garter, welting), or more complex patterns.

different combinations of knit and purl stitches, along with more advanced techniques, generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency, from gauzy to very dense, from highly stretchy to relatively stiff, from flat to tightly curled, and so on.

close-up of knitting texture[edit] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch—as seen, though very small, in machine-made stockings and t-shirts—which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches, and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl.

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches, including garter stitch, ribbing, and moss and seed stitches.

close-up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures.

combining certain increases, which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric, with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace, a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace.

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop-stitch knitting technique.

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next, usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder, is key to cable knitting, producing an endless variety of cables, honeycombs, ropes, and aran sweater patterning.

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares, picking up their side edges, and knitting more squares to continue the piece.

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric.

color[edit] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn, but there are many ways to work in multiple colors.

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color (intarsia, for example), busy small-scale patterns of color (such as fair isle), or both (double knitting and slip-stitch color, for example).

hand knitting process[edit] a woman in the process of hand knitting (1904) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters.

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on, which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle.

provisional cast-ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast-on.

there are various methods employed to cast on, such as the "thumb method" (also known as "slingshot" or "long-tail" cast-ons), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will, when knitted, give a very loose edge ideal for "picking up stitches" and knitting a border; the "double needle method" (also known as "knit-on" or "cable cast-on"), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then "knitted on", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border; and many more.

most western-style hand knitters follow either the english style (in which the yarn is held in the right hand) or the continental style (in which the yarn is held in the left hand).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting.

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting.

a third method, called combination knitting, goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch.

[18] once the hand knitted piece is finished, the remaining live stitches are "cast off".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing, especially larger ones like sweaters, the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces, with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together.

seamless knitting, where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece, is also possible.

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best-known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques.

smaller items, such as socks and hats, are usually knit in one piece on double-pointed needles or circular needles.

(see circular knitting.)

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting.

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for hand-knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins (hanks), and it may also be wound on spools or cones.

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color; skeins from different dye-lots, even if very similar in color, are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together.

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online.

otherwise, knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier.

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles, whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles.

hence, thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches, and therefore less time, to knit up a given garment.

in the british commonwealth (outside north america) yarns are measured as 1ply, 2ply, 3ply, 4ply, 5ply, 8ply (or double knit),10ply and 12ply (triple knit).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn (top) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center (bottom).

the latter is better for knitting, since the yarn is much less likely to tangle.

before knitting, the knitter will typically transform a hank/skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

when knitting, some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar-lid.

a yarn's usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors, such as its loft (its ability to trap air), its resilience (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its hand (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its hairiness (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and of course its look, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features.

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects, so there is no one "best" yarn.

the resilience and propensity to (un)twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand-knitting.

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit, whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches, in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch.

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition, corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn.

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for knitting, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting.

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is, or braided or plied with another.

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes; conversely, a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design, such as a cable or lace pattern.

metal wire[edit] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines.

glass and wax[edit] close-up of "jitterbug" – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting, lost-wax casting, mold-making, and kiln-casting.

the process involves: knitting with wax strands[21] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat-tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out, thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools, the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece.

[22] tools[edit] the process of knitting has three basic tasks: the active (unsecured) stitches must be held so they don't drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric, usually through active stitches, thus securing them.

in very simple cases, knitting can be done without tools, using only the fingers to do these tasks; however, knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles, knitting machines or rigid frames.

depending on their size and shape, the rigid frames are called stocking frames, knitting boards, knitting rings (also called knitting looms) or knitting spools (also known as knitting knobbies, knitting nancies, or corkers).

there is also a technique called knooking[23] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end, to hold the stitches while they're being worked.

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting, to measure and design knitted garments, or to make knitting easier or more comfortable.

needles[edit] main article: knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials.

there are three basic types of knitting needles (also called "knitting pins").

such needles are usually 10–16 inches (250–410 mm) long but, due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics, may be used to knit pieces significantly wider.

the diameter affects the size of stitches, which affects the gauge/tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric.

thus, a simple way to change gauge/tension is to use different needles, which is the basis of uneven knitting.

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters, there are several measurement systems, particularly those specific to the united states, the united kingdom and japan; a conversion table is given at knitting needle.

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials, but the most common materials are metals, wood, bamboo, and plastic.

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting, whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches.

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends.

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark.

double-pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes.

the second type of knitting needles are straight, double-pointed knitting needles (also called "dpns").

double-pointed needles are tapered at both ends, which allows them to be knit from either end.

dpns are typically used for circular knitting, especially smaller tube-shaped pieces such as sleeves, collars, and socks; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches.

the two tapered ends (typically 5 inches (130 mm) long) are rigid and straight, allowing for easy knitting; however, the two ends are connected by a flexible strand (usually nylon) that allows the two ends to be brought together.

circular needles are typically 24-60 inches long, and are usually used singly or in pairs; again, the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle.

the cables/cords are screwed into the needles, allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles.

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed.

circular knitting needles in different lengths, materials and sizes, including plastic, aluminum, steel and nickel-plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting, such as slip-stitch versions of double knitting.

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting.

when cabling a knitted piece, a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn.

cable needles are typically very short (a few inches), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted.

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern, the cable needle is moved, the stitches on it are worked by the other needles, then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist.

cable needles cable needles are a specific design, and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable.

largest circular knitting needles[edit] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall.

record[edit] julia hopson with world-record 3.5 meter (11'6") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson[24] of penzance in cornwall.

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6.5 centimeters (2½") in diameter and 3.5 meters (11'6") long.

ancillary tools[edit] some ancillary tools, also called notions, used by hand-knitters.

various tools have been developed to make hand-knitting easier.

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding/casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge-to-edge.

other tools such as knitting spools or pom-pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments.

for large or complex knitting patterns, it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way; therefore, several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch, including circular stitch markers, hanging markers, extra yarn and row counters.

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended; this is prevented by "point protectors" that cap the tapered ends.

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles; for this, special stress-relieving gloves are available.

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed.

finally, there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting, yarns and needles.

knitting styles/holds[edit] continental/german style[edit] main article: continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling.

norwegian style[edit] main article: norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style, the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle.

[25] russian style[edit] another variation on continental knitting, this style is achieved by "picking" up the yarn by moving the needle head into it.

in russian knitting, it is common to slip the first stitch of every row.

english style[edit] main article: english knitting english-style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand.

portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style[edit] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace-style hook, allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse (purl) side, e.g.

"inside out" compared to western knitting techniques.

this is an ancient style of knitting, which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula, during its occupation by muslims.

knitting techniques[edit] armenian[edit] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non-working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats.

double knitting[edit] main article: double knittinga technique used to create a flat, smooth, reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides, rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side.

mega knitting[edit] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter.

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting, except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles.

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless, automated knitting.

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted, meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle.

turn the left (non-working) hook to face away at all times; turn the right (working) hook toward you up whilst knitting (plain stitch) and away whilst purling.

mega knitting produces a chunky, bulky fabric or an open lacy weave, depending on the weight and type of yarn used.

[26] micro knitting[edit] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles.

[27][28][29] she has published bugknits: extreme knitting for hobbyists, artists and knitters (2009, blurb: isbn 978-1320025546).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0.4mm.

[30][31] short row[edit] main article: short row (knitting) in short row knitting, the work is turned before a row is fully knitted.

wrap and turn[edit] just before the work is turned, the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch, forming a “wrap.” later, this “wrap” is picked up and knitted into a stitch, concealing it from view.

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted, or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front, if it is to be purled, both of which maintain the proper (“tipped back”) orientation of the german double stitch.

twined knitting[edit] main article: twined knitting the technique, also known as two-end knitting, is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique.

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch.

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one-end knitting.

commercial applications[edit] industrially, metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres, catalytic converters for cars and many other uses.

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines.

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections.

gordana gelhausen, who appeared in season six of the television show project runway, is primarily a knit designer.

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors, fendi, and marc jacobs.

for individual hobbyists, websites such as etsy, big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale, in a way similar to ebay.

graffiti[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the 2000s, a practice called knitting graffiti, guerilla knitting, or yarn bombing—the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings—emerged in the u.s. and spread worldwide.

[32] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom.

for instance, dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large-scale public art installation in melbourne, australia for the big west arts festival in 2009. the work was vandalized the night of its completion.

[34] a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti".

the event is typically a multi-day event that caters to all knitters, crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community.

over the multi-day period, multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts, give away free exclusive patterns, provide classes, trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes.

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn, knitting and crochet goodies.

some local crawls also provide a knit-along (kal) or crochet-along (cal) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see.

[36][37][38][39] charity[edit] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st. louis, missouri, red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups.

girls and women hand knitted socks, sweaters, scarves, mittens, gloves, and hats for soldiers in crimea, the american civil war, and the boer wars; this practice continued in world war i, world war ii and the korean war, and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan.

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war.

in the historical projects, yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross.

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100% worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors.

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves.

prayer shawls, or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient, are donated to those experiencing loss or stress.

many knitters today hand knit and donate "chemo caps", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy.

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps.

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks.

[40] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers.

[41] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami, knitters without borders[42] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl-mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières (doctors without borders).

instead of hand knitting for charity, knitters are encouraged to donate a week's worth of disposable income, including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn.

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors.

as of september 2011, knitters without borders donors have contributed cad$1,062,217.

this outreach is described as, "afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people-to-people project that sends hand-knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters, vests, hats, mittens, and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan.

"[45] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find, as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation.

[46] health benefits[edit] the earliest image of circular knitting, from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting, along with other forms of needlework, provide several significant health benefits.

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress, pain and depression, which in turn strengthens the body's immune system,[47] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure, heart rate, help prevent illness, and have a calming effect.

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry, resulting in an increase in "feel good" hormones (i.e.

[47] hand knitting, along with other leisure activities, has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer's[48] and dementia by preventing memory loss.

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you, making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits.

[50] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links,[51] an organization founded in bath, england.

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others.

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other.

[2] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts.

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers.

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit.

[2] notable knitters[edit] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american-born, british-based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl-mcphee - is a writer, knitter, and knit-wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g. walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter, fashion designer, educator, and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british-born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer.

[52] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics' special mathematical and mechanical properties.

see also[edit] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references[edit] ^ "techniques with theresa, frog pond edition".

^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit" (spencer 1989:17).

warp knitted fabrics construction.

^ "knitting basics".

alamac american knits llc.

warp-knitting technology (2nd ed.).

shadow knitting.

slip-stitch knitting: color pattern the easy way.

alice starmore's book of fair isle knitting.

cables untangled: an exploration of cable knitting.

the complete book of traditional aran knitting.

"knitting is coding".

"how to do the knit stitch".

stitch 'n bitch: the knitter's handbook.

^ "knitting with glass – impossible!?".

^ "knitting glass (fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011)" (pdf).

^ "it's official: julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world".

knitwitspenzance.co.uk.

^ "the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them)".

allfreeknitting.com.

"anthea crome: world's smallest knitwear".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"seventy stitches to the inch: althea crome's tiny knits".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"knitters turn to graffiti artists with 'yarnbombing'".

"the graffiti knitting epidemic".

"artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork".

"a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti"".

"knitters without borders".

"knitting and crochet offer long-term health benefits".

^ "knitting can keep alzheimer's at bay".

the principles of knitting: methods and techniques of hand knitting.

"knitting".

a history of hand knitting.

knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide.

mary thomas's knitting book.

knitting without tears.

knitknit: profiles and projects from knitting's new wave.

(2008) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner.

(1981) elizabeth zimmermann's knitter's almanac.

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that?

isbn 978-1482748048 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting.

look up knitting in wiktionary, the free dictionary.

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article "knitting".

craftyarncouncil.com, relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge.

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting "knitting".

ravelry - a yarn-working social network (from their about page: "ravelry is an inclusive, friendly website for knitters, crocheters, spinners, weavers, and dyers".

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette/stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding/casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop-stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip-stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee (inventor) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl-mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g. walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch 'n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=knitting&oldid=1149831060" categories: knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

2weft and warp knitting [ 3 ] 1 .

3knit and purl stitches 1 .

4differences between knitting and crocheting 1 .

2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1largest circular knitting needles 6 .

2ancillary tools 7knitting styles / holds toggle knitting styles / holds subsection 7 .

3portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8 .

2double knitting 8 .

4mega knitting 8 .

5micro knitting 8 .

7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া башҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어ह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ ್ ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn " knit " redirects here .

for other uses , see knitting ( disambiguation ).

find sources : " knitting " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( december 2021 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches : knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns .

knitting may be done by hand or by machine .

knitting creates stitches : loops of yarn in a row , either flat or in the round ( tubular ).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time .

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows .

differences in yarn ( varying in fibre type , weight , uniformity and twist ), needle size , and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties , including color , texture , thickness , heat retention , water resistance , and integrity .

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch .

structure [ edit ] courses and wales [ edit ] structure of stockinette stitch , a common weave in knitted fabric .

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches .

like weaving , knitting is a technique for producing a two - dimensional fabric made from a one - dimensional yarn or thread .

by contrast , the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path ( a course ), forming symmetric loops ( also called bights ) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn .

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics .

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern , knitted garments can stretch as much as 500 %.

for this reason , knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer ' s motions , such as socks and hosiery .

knitted garments are often more form - fitting than woven garments , since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body ' s outline more closely ; by contrast , curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts , flares , gussets and gores , the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further .

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams , as in the heel of a sock ; the effect of darts , flares , etc .

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting , which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric .

if they are not secured , the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled ; this is known as ripping out , unravelling knitting , or humorously , frogging ( because you ' rip it ', this sounds like a frog croaking : ' rib - bit ').

[ 2 ] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric , a method for casting on is used ; to secure the final stitches in a wale , one uses a method of binding / casting off .

during knitting , the active stitches are secured mechanically , either from individual hooks ( in knitting machines ) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand - knitting .

basic pattern of warp knitting .

weft and warp knitting [ 3 ][ edit ] see also : warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting : weft knitting and warp knitting .

[ 4 ] in the more common weft knitting , the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn .

in warp knitting , the wales and courses run roughly parallel .

in weft knitting , the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn , by adding stitches to each wale in turn , moving across the fabric as in a raster scan .

by contrast , in warp knitting , one yarn is required for every wale .

[ 3 ] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales , warp knitting is typically done by machine , whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine .

[ 5 ] warp - knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs , and are commonly used in lingerie .

[ 6 ] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft - knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns , usually to produce interesting color patterns .

g ., a red apple on a field of green ; in that case , the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time .

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously ( e .

in the knit stitch on the left , the next ( red ) loop passes through the previous ( yellow ) loop from below , whereas in the purl stitch ( right ), the next stitch enters from above .

thus , a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other , and vice versa .

knit and purl stitches [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types .

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row ; this produces ' stockinette ' stitch .

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit , consistent with ' garter ' stitch .

if the former , the stitch is denoted as a ' knit stitch ' or a ' plain stitch ;' if the latter , as a ' purl stitch '.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side .

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect ; the knit stitches look like ' v ' s stacked vertically , whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric .

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as " pixels "; however , such pixels are usually rectangular , rather than square , depending on the gauge / tension of the knitting .

individual stitches , or rows of stitches , may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop ( an elongated stitch ), which is the basis for uneven knitting : a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect .

in the simplest of hand - knitted fabrics , every row of stitches are all knit ( or all purl ); this creates a garter stitch fabric .

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern / stocking stitch .

vertical stripes ( ribbing ) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches .

for example , a common choice is 2x2 ribbing , in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches , etc .

horizontal striping ( welting ) is also possible , by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches .

checkerboard patterns ( basketweave ) are also possible , the smallest of which is known as seed / moss stitch : the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row .

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row , such as in stockinette / stocking stitch , have a tendency to curl — top and bottom curl toward the front ( or knitted side ) while the sides curl toward the back ( or purled side ); by contrast , those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically ( such as ribbing , garter stitch or seed / moss stitch ) have more texture and tend to lie flat .

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede , whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward , giving the fabric more stretchability .

thus , the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible , since the neighboring knit wales come forward .

conversely , rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches .

this is the basis of shadow knitting , in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions .

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted , dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric , e .

the merged stitches need not be from the same row ; for example , a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows , producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric .

not every stitch in a row need be knitted ; some may be ' missed ' ( unknitted and passed to the active needle ) and knitted on a subsequent row .

this is known as slip - stitch knitting .

[ 8 ] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones .

for example , a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts .

mosaic knitting is a form of slip - stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns ; mosaic - knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair - isle knitting .

this is known as drop - stitch knitting , and produces a vertical ladder of see - through holes in the fabric , corresponding to where the wale had been .

differences between knitting and crocheting [ edit ] for many beginners , telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky .

[ clarification needed ] when knitting , the stitches form a shape that is similar to a " v ", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together .

when knitting , a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles .

often times , crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting .

right - and left - plaited stitches [ edit ] see also : plaited stitch ( knitting ) the stitches on the right are right - plaited , whereas the stitches on the left are left - plaited .

within limits , an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches , whether they be knit or purl .

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted : usually once if at all , but sometimes twice and ( very rarely ) thrice .

hand - knitters generally produce right - plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops , i .

by contrast , the left - plaited stitch is generally formed by hand - knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way , rather than by any change in the needle .

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire .

edges and joins between fabrics [ edit ] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast - on and bound / cast - off edges .

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric , e .

g ., for button holes , by binding / casting off and re - casting on again ( horizontal ) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately .

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery - based grafting methods , most commonly the kitchener stitch .

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric ; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac , in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern .

illustration of cable knitting .

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches .

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit , the wales can be made to cross .

cables , increases , and lace [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches ordinarily , stitches are knitted in the same order in every row , and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric .

however , this need not be so , since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another , forming a cable pattern .

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together , making it denser and less elastic ;[ 10 ] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling .

[ 11 ] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting , with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards ; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric .

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale , such as appear in celtic knots , but these are inexact approximations .

however , such circular wales are possible using swiss darning , a form of embroidery , or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric .

in lace knitting , the pattern is formed by making small , stable holes in the fabric , generally with yarn overs .

this is used to great effect in lace knitting , which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes , rather than with the stitches themselves .

[ 12 ] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic ; for example , some shetland " wedding - ring " shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring .

by combining increases and decreases , it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical , even in weft knitting .

this is the basis for bias knitting , and can be used for visual effect , similar to the direction of a brush - stroke in oil painting .

ornamentations and additions [ edit ] various point - like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric .

long loops can also be drawn out and secured , forming a " shaggy " texture to the fabric ; this is known as loop knitting .

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery ; if the embroidery resembles knitting , it is often called swiss darning .

various closures for the garments , such as frogs and buttons can be added ; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment , rather than cut .

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique .

for example , differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture .

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit .

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth , as is done in tufting and " weaving " ( also known as " couching ").

history and culture [ edit ] main article : history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan , to knot .

[ 13 ] the exact origins of knitting are unknown , the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat , now part of cairo .

[ 14 ] nålebinding ( danish : literally " binding with a needle " or " needle - binding ") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet .

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century ( tournai in 1429 , barcelona in 1496 ).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization ( not necessarily a guild ) of knitters from 1268 .

[ 15 ] the occupation : " cap knitter " describes margaret yeo , of london , in 1473 .

[ 16 ] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame , an early form of knitting machine , knitting " by hand " became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber .

similar to quilting , spinning , and needlepoint , hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy .

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop , richard rutt , authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting ( batsford , 1987 ).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art ( university of southampton ).

properties of fabrics [ edit ] main article : knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch , the most basic weft - knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex .

unlike woven fabrics , where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically , yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row , as with the red strand in the diagram at left , in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it .

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern , a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions .

many modern stretchy garments , even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch , also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns .

close - up of front of stockinette stitch close - up of back of stockinette stitch , also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric ( as in the diagram , and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern ) has a definite " right side " and " wrong side ".

stitches can be worked from either side , and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the " wrong side " stitches , known as purl stitches , either in columns ( ribbing ), rows ( garter , welting ), or more complex patterns .

different combinations of knit and purl stitches , along with more advanced techniques , generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency , from gauzy to very dense , from highly stretchy to relatively stiff , from flat to tightly curled , and so on .

close - up of knitting texture [ edit ] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch — as seen , though very small , in machine - made stockings and t - shirts — which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches , and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl .

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches , including garter stitch , ribbing , and moss and seed stitches .

close - up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures .

combining certain increases , which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric , with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace , a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace .

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop - stitch knitting technique .

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next , usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder , is key to cable knitting , producing an endless variety of cables , honeycombs , ropes , and aran sweater patterning .

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares , picking up their side edges , and knitting more squares to continue the piece .

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric .

color [ edit ] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn , but there are many ways to work in multiple colors .

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color ( intarsia , for example ), busy small - scale patterns of color ( such as fair isle ), or both ( double knitting and slip - stitch color , for example ).

hand knitting process [ edit ] a woman in the process of hand knitting ( 1904 ) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters .

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on , which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle .

provisional cast - ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast - on .

there are various methods employed to cast on , such as the " thumb method " ( also known as " slingshot " or " long - tail " cast - ons ), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will , when knitted , give a very loose edge ideal for " picking up stitches " and knitting a border ; the " double needle method " ( also known as " knit - on " or " cable cast - on "), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then " knitted on ", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border ; and many more .

most western - style hand knitters follow either the english style ( in which the yarn is held in the right hand ) or the continental style ( in which the yarn is held in the left hand ).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting .

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting .

a third method , called combination knitting , goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch .

[ 18 ] once the hand knitted piece is finished , the remaining live stitches are " cast off ".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing , especially larger ones like sweaters , the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces , with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together .

seamless knitting , where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece , is also possible .

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best - known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques .

smaller items , such as socks and hats , are usually knit in one piece on double - pointed needles or circular needles .

( see circular knitting .)

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting .

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for hand - knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins ( hanks ), and it may also be wound on spools or cones .

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color ; skeins from different dye - lots , even if very similar in color , are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together .

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project , additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online .

otherwise , knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier .

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles , whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles .

hence , thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches , and therefore less time , to knit up a given garment .

in the british commonwealth ( outside north america ) yarns are measured as 1ply , 2ply , 3ply , 4ply , 5ply , 8ply ( or double knit ), 10ply and 12ply ( triple knit ).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn ( top ) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center ( bottom ).

the latter is better for knitting , since the yarn is much less likely to tangle .

before knitting , the knitter will typically transform a hank / skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball ; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

when knitting , some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns ; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar - lid .

a yarn ' s usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors , such as its loft ( its ability to trap air ), its resilience ( elasticity under tension ), its washability and colorfastness , its hand ( its feel , particularly softness vs .

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects , so there is no one " best " yarn .

the resilience and propensity to ( un ) twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand - knitting .

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension ; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit , whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches , in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch .

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition , corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn .

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for knitting , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting .

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is , or braided or plied with another .

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects , such as diagonal stripes ; conversely , a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design , such as a cable or lace pattern .

metal wire [ edit ] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines .

glass and wax [ edit ] close - up of " jitterbug " – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting , lost - wax casting , mold - making , and kiln - casting .

the process involves : knitting with wax strands [ 21 ] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat - tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out , thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools , the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece .

[ 22 ] tools [ edit ] the process of knitting has three basic tasks : the active ( unsecured ) stitches must be held so they don ' t drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric , usually through active stitches , thus securing them .

in very simple cases , knitting can be done without tools , using only the fingers to do these tasks ; however , knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles , knitting machines or rigid frames .

depending on their size and shape , the rigid frames are called stocking frames , knitting boards , knitting rings ( also called knitting looms ) or knitting spools ( also known as knitting knobbies , knitting nancies , or corkers ).

there is also a technique called knooking [ 23 ] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end , to hold the stitches while they ' re being worked .

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting , to measure and design knitted garments , or to make knitting easier or more comfortable .

needles [ edit ] main article : knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials .

there are three basic types of knitting needles ( also called " knitting pins ").

such needles are usually 10 – 16 inches ( 250 – 410 mm ) long but , due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics , may be used to knit pieces significantly wider .

the diameter affects the size of stitches , which affects the gauge / tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric .

thus , a simple way to change gauge / tension is to use different needles , which is the basis of uneven knitting .

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters , there are several measurement systems , particularly those specific to the united states , the united kingdom and japan ; a conversion table is given at knitting needle .

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials , but the most common materials are metals , wood , bamboo , and plastic .

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently ; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting , whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches .

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends .

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark .

double - pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes .

the second type of knitting needles are straight , double - pointed knitting needles ( also called " dpns ").

double - pointed needles are tapered at both ends , which allows them to be knit from either end .

dpns are typically used for circular knitting , especially smaller tube - shaped pieces such as sleeves , collars , and socks ; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches .

the two tapered ends ( typically 5 inches ( 130 mm ) long ) are rigid and straight , allowing for easy knitting ; however , the two ends are connected by a flexible strand ( usually nylon ) that allows the two ends to be brought together .

circular needles are typically 24 - 60 inches long , and are usually used singly or in pairs ; again , the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle .

the cables / cords are screwed into the needles , allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles .

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed .

circular knitting needles in different lengths , materials and sizes , including plastic , aluminum , steel and nickel - plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting , such as slip - stitch versions of double knitting .

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting .

when cabling a knitted piece , a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn .

cable needles are typically very short ( a few inches ), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted .

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern , the cable needle is moved , the stitches on it are worked by the other needles , then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist .

cable needles cable needles are a specific design , and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable .

largest circular knitting needles [ edit ] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall .

5 meter ( 11 ' 6 ") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson [ 24 ] of penzance in cornwall .

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6 .

ancillary tools [ edit ] some ancillary tools , also called notions , used by hand - knitters .

various tools have been developed to make hand - knitting easier .

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding / casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge - to - edge .

other tools such as knitting spools or pom - pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments .

for large or complex knitting patterns , it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way ; therefore , several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch , including circular stitch markers , hanging markers , extra yarn and row counters .

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended ; this is prevented by " point protectors " that cap the tapered ends .

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles ; for this , special stress - relieving gloves are available .

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed .

finally , there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting , yarns and needles .

knitting styles / holds [ edit ] continental / german style [ edit ] main article : continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling .

norwegian style [ edit ] main article : norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style , the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle .

[ 25 ] russian style [ edit ] another variation on continental knitting , this style is achieved by " picking " up the yarn by moving the needle head into it .

in russian knitting , it is common to slip the first stitch of every row .

english style [ edit ] main article : english knitting english - style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand .

portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style [ edit ] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace - style hook , allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse ( purl ) side , e .

inside out " compared to western knitting techniques .

this is an ancient style of knitting , which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula , during its occupation by muslims .

knitting techniques [ edit ] armenian [ edit ] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non - working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats .

double knitting [ edit ] main article : double knittinga technique used to create a flat , smooth , reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides , rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side .

mega knitting [ edit ] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter .

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting , except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles .

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless , automated knitting .

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted , meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle .

turn the left ( non - working ) hook to face away at all times ; turn the right ( working ) hook toward you up whilst knitting ( plain stitch ) and away whilst purling .

mega knitting produces a chunky , bulky fabric or an open lacy weave , depending on the weight and type of yarn used .

[ 26 ] micro knitting [ edit ] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles .

[ 27 ][ 28 ][ 29 ] she has published bugknits : extreme knitting for hobbyists , artists and knitters ( 2009 , blurb : isbn 978 - 1320025546 ).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0 .

[ 30 ][ 31 ] short row [ edit ] main article : short row ( knitting ) in short row knitting , the work is turned before a row is fully knitted .

wrap and turn [ edit ] just before the work is turned , the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch , forming a “ wrap .” later , this “ wrap ” is picked up and knitted into a stitch , concealing it from view .

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted , or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front , if it is to be purled , both of which maintain the proper (“ tipped back ”) orientation of the german double stitch .

twined knitting [ edit ] main article : twined knitting the technique , also known as two - end knitting , is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique .

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch .

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one - end knitting .

commercial applications [ edit ] industrially , metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres , catalytic converters for cars and many other uses .

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines .

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections .

gordana gelhausen , who appeared in season six of the television show project runway , is primarily a knit designer .

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors , fendi , and marc jacobs .

for individual hobbyists , websites such as etsy , big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale , in a way similar to ebay .

graffiti [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the 2000s , a practice called knitting graffiti , guerilla knitting , or yarn bombing — the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings — emerged in the u .

[ 32 ] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom .

for instance , dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large - scale public art installation in melbourne , australia for the big west arts festival in 2009 .

[ 34 ] a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti ".

the event is typically a multi - day event that caters to all knitters , crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community .

over the multi - day period , multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts , give away free exclusive patterns , provide classes , trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes .

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn , knitting and crochet goodies .

some local crawls also provide a knit - along ( kal ) or crochet - along ( cal ) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see .

[ 36 ][ 37 ][ 38 ][ 39 ] charity [ edit ] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st .

louis , missouri , red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups .

girls and women hand knitted socks , sweaters , scarves , mittens , gloves , and hats for soldiers in crimea , the american civil war , and the boer wars ; this practice continued in world war i , world war ii and the korean war , and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan .

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war .

in the historical projects , yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services ; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross .

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners ; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100 % worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors .

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves .

prayer shawls , or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient , are donated to those experiencing loss or stress .

many knitters today hand knit and donate " chemo caps ", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy .

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps .

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks .

[ 40 ] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers .

[ 41 ] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami , knitters without borders [ 42 ] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl - mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières ( doctors without borders ).

instead of hand knitting for charity , knitters are encouraged to donate a week ' s worth of disposable income , including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn .

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors .

as of september 2011 , knitters without borders donors have contributed cad $ 1 , 062 , 217 .

this outreach is described as , " afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people - to - people project that sends hand - knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters , vests , hats , mittens , and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan .

"[ 45 ] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find , as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation .

[ 46 ] health benefits [ edit ] the earliest image of circular knitting , from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting , along with other forms of needlework , provide several significant health benefits .

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress , pain and depression , which in turn strengthens the body ' s immune system ,[ 47 ] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure , heart rate , help prevent illness , and have a calming effect .

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry , resulting in an increase in " feel good " hormones ( i .

[ 47 ] hand knitting , along with other leisure activities , has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer ' s [ 48 ] and dementia by preventing memory loss .

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you , making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits .

[ 50 ] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links ,[ 51 ] an organization founded in bath , england .

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction ; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others .

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other .

[ 2 ] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts .

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers .

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit .

[ 2 ] notable knitters [ edit ] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american - born , british - based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl - mcphee - is a writer , knitter , and knit - wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g .

walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter , fashion designer , educator , and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british - born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer .

[ 52 ] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics ' special mathematical and mechanical properties .

see also [ edit ] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references [ edit ] ^ " techniques with theresa , frog pond edition ".

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit " ( spencer 1989 : 17 ).

warp knitted fabrics construction .

^ " knitting basics ".

alamac american knits llc .

warp - knitting technology ( 2nd ed .

shadow knitting .

slip - stitch knitting : color pattern the easy way .

alice starmore ' s book of fair isle knitting .

cables untangled : an exploration of cable knitting .

the complete book of traditional aran knitting .

knitting is coding ".

how to do the knit stitch ".

stitch ' n bitch : the knitter ' s handbook .

^ " knitting with glass – impossible !

^ " knitting glass ( fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011 )" ( pdf ).

^ " it ' s official : julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world ".

knitwitspenzance .

^ " the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them )".

allfreeknitting .

anthea crome : world ' s smallest knitwear ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

seventy stitches to the inch : althea crome ' s tiny knits ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

knitters turn to graffiti artists with ' yarnbombing '".

the graffiti knitting epidemic ".

artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork ".

a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti "".

knitters without borders ".

knitting and crochet offer long - term health benefits ".

^ " knitting can keep alzheimer ' s at bay ".

the principles of knitting : methods and techniques of hand knitting .

knitting ".

a history of hand knitting .

knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide .

mary thomas ' s knitting book .

knitting without tears .

knitknit : profiles and projects from knitting ' s new wave .

( 2008 ) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner .

( 1981 ) elizabeth zimmermann ' s knitter ' s almanac .

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that ?

isbn 978 - 1482748048 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting .

look up knitting in wiktionary , the free dictionary .

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article " knitting ".

com , relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge .

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting " knitting ".

ravelry - a yarn - working social network ( from their about page : " ravelry is an inclusive , friendly website for knitters , crocheters , spinners , weavers , and dyers ". "

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette / stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding / casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop - stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip - stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee ( inventor ) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl - mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g .

walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch ' n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from " https :// en .

title = knitting & oldid = 1149831060 " categories : knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1structure toggle structure subsection 1.1courses and wales 1.2weft and warp knitting[3] 1.3knit and purl stitches 1.4differences between knitting and crocheting 1.5right- and left-plaited stitches 1.6edges and joins between fabrics 1.7cables, increases, and lace 1.8ornamentations and additions 2history and culture 3properties of fabrics toggle properties of fabrics subsection 3.1texture 3.2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1yarn 5.2metal wire 5.3glass and wax 6tools toggle tools subsection 6.1needles 6.1.1largest circular knitting needles 6.1.2record 6.2ancillary tools 7knitting styles/holds toggle knitting styles/holds subsection 7.1continental/german style 7.1.1norwegian style 7.1.2russian style 7.2english style 7.3portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8.1armenian 8.2double knitting 8.3fair isle 8.4mega knitting 8.5micro knitting 8.6short row 8.6.1wrap and turn 8.6.2german short row 8.6.3japanese short row 8.7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাбашҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어हिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn "knit" redirects here.

for other uses, see knitting (disambiguation).

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "knitting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (december 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches: knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns.

knitting may be done by hand or by machine.

knitting creates stitches: loops of yarn in a row, either flat or in the round (tubular).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time.

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows.

differences in yarn (varying in fibre type, weight, uniformity and twist), needle size, and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties, including color, texture, thickness, heat retention, water resistance, and integrity.

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch.

structure[edit] courses and wales[edit] structure of stockinette stitch, a common weave in knitted fabric.

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches.

like weaving, knitting is a technique for producing a two-dimensional fabric made from a one-dimensional yarn or thread.

by contrast, the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path (a course), forming symmetric loops (also called bights) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn.

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics.

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%.

for this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer's motions, such as socks and hosiery.

knitted garments are often more form-fitting than woven garments, since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body's outline more closely; by contrast, curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts, flares, gussets and gores, the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further.

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc.

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting, which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric.

if they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled; this is known as ripping out, unravelling knitting, or humorously, frogging (because you 'rip it', this sounds like a frog croaking: 'rib-bit').

[2] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric, a method for casting on is used; to secure the final stitches in a wale, one uses a method of binding/casting off.

during knitting, the active stitches are secured mechanically, either from individual hooks (in knitting machines) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand-knitting.

basic pattern of warp knitting.

weft and warp knitting[3][edit] see also: warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting.

[4] in the more common weft knitting, the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn.

in warp knitting, the wales and courses run roughly parallel.

in weft knitting, the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn, by adding stitches to each wale in turn, moving across the fabric as in a raster scan.

by contrast, in warp knitting, one yarn is required for every wale.

[3] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales, warp knitting is typically done by machine, whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine.

[5] warp-knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs, and are commonly used in lingerie.

[6] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft-knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns, usually to produce interesting color patterns.

in intarsia, the yarns are used in well-segregated regions, e.g., a red apple on a field of green; in that case, the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time.

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously (e.g., two socks).

in the knit stitch on the left, the next (red) loop passes through the previous (yellow) loop from below, whereas in the purl stitch (right), the next stitch enters from above.

thus, a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other, and vice versa.

knit and purl stitches[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types.

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row; this produces 'stockinette' stitch.

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit, consistent with 'garter' stitch.

if the former, the stitch is denoted as a 'knit stitch' or a 'plain stitch;' if the latter, as a 'purl stitch'.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side.

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect; the knit stitches look like 'v's stacked vertically, whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric.

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as "pixels"; however, such pixels are usually rectangular, rather than square, depending on the gauge/tension of the knitting.

individual stitches, or rows of stitches, may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop (an elongated stitch), which is the basis for uneven knitting: a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect.

in the simplest of hand-knitted fabrics, every row of stitches are all knit (or all purl); this creates a garter stitch fabric.

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern/stocking stitch.

vertical stripes (ribbing) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches.

for example, a common choice is 2x2 ribbing, in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches, etc.

horizontal striping (welting) is also possible, by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches.

checkerboard patterns (basketweave) are also possible, the smallest of which is known as seed/moss stitch: the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row.

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row, such as in stockinette/stocking stitch, have a tendency to curl—top and bottom curl toward the front (or knitted side) while the sides curl toward the back (or purled side); by contrast, those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically (such as ribbing, garter stitch or seed/moss stitch) have more texture and tend to lie flat.

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede, whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward, giving the fabric more stretchability.

thus, the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible, since the neighboring knit wales come forward.

conversely, rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches.

this is the basis of shadow knitting, in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions.

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted, dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric, e.g., the lower leaves of a flower.

the merged stitches need not be from the same row; for example, a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows, producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric.

not every stitch in a row need be knitted; some may be 'missed' (unknitted and passed to the active needle) and knitted on a subsequent row.

this is known as slip-stitch knitting.

[8] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones.

for example, a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts.

mosaic knitting is a form of slip-stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns; mosaic-knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair-isle knitting.

this is known as drop-stitch knitting, and produces a vertical ladder of see-through holes in the fabric, corresponding to where the wale had been.

differences between knitting and crocheting[edit] for many beginners, telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky.

[clarification needed] when knitting, the stitches form a shape that is similar to a "v", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together.

when knitting, a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles.

often times, crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting.

right- and left-plaited stitches[edit] see also: plaited stitch (knitting) the stitches on the right are right-plaited, whereas the stitches on the left are left-plaited.

within limits, an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches, whether they be knit or purl.

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted: usually once if at all, but sometimes twice and (very rarely) thrice.

hand-knitters generally produce right-plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops, i.e., passing the needle through the initial stitch in an unusual way, but wrapping the yarn as usual.

by contrast, the left-plaited stitch is generally formed by hand-knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way, rather than by any change in the needle.

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire.

edges and joins between fabrics[edit] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast-on and bound/cast-off edges.

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric, e.g., for button holes, by binding/casting off and re-casting on again (horizontal) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately.

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery-based grafting methods, most commonly the kitchener stitch.

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac, in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern.

illustration of cable knitting.

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches.

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit, the wales can be made to cross.

cables, increases, and lace[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches ordinarily, stitches are knitted in the same order in every row, and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric.

however, this need not be so, since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another, forming a cable pattern.

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together, making it denser and less elastic;[10] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling.

[11] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting, with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric.

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale, such as appear in celtic knots, but these are inexact approximations.

however, such circular wales are possible using swiss darning, a form of embroidery, or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric.

in lace knitting, the pattern is formed by making small, stable holes in the fabric, generally with yarn overs.

this is used to great effect in lace knitting, which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes, rather than with the stitches themselves.

[12] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic; for example, some shetland "wedding-ring" shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring.

by combining increases and decreases, it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical, even in weft knitting.

this is the basis for bias knitting, and can be used for visual effect, similar to the direction of a brush-stroke in oil painting.

ornamentations and additions[edit] various point-like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric.

long loops can also be drawn out and secured, forming a "shaggy" texture to the fabric; this is known as loop knitting.

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery; if the embroidery resembles knitting, it is often called swiss darning.

various closures for the garments, such as frogs and buttons can be added; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment, rather than cut.

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique.

for example, differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture.

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit.

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth, as is done in tufting and "weaving" (also known as "couching").

history and culture[edit] main article: history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan, to knot.

[13] the exact origins of knitting are unknown, the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat, now part of cairo.

[14] nålebinding (danish: literally "binding with a needle" or "needle-binding") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet.

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century (tournai in 1429, barcelona in 1496).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization (not necessarily a guild) of knitters from 1268.

[15] the occupation: "cap knitter" describes margaret yeo, of london, in 1473.

[16] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame, an early form of knitting machine, knitting "by hand" became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber.

similar to quilting, spinning, and needlepoint, hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy.

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop, richard rutt, authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting (batsford, 1987).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art (university of southampton).

properties of fabrics[edit] main article: knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch, the most basic weft-knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex.

unlike woven fabrics, where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically, yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row, as with the red strand in the diagram at left, in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it.

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern, a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions.

many modern stretchy garments, even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch, also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns.

close-up of front of stockinette stitch close-up of back of stockinette stitch, also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric (as in the diagram, and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern) has a definite "right side" and "wrong side".

stitches can be worked from either side, and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the "wrong side" stitches, known as purl stitches, either in columns (ribbing), rows (garter, welting), or more complex patterns.

different combinations of knit and purl stitches, along with more advanced techniques, generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency, from gauzy to very dense, from highly stretchy to relatively stiff, from flat to tightly curled, and so on.

close-up of knitting texture[edit] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch—as seen, though very small, in machine-made stockings and t-shirts—which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches, and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl.

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches, including garter stitch, ribbing, and moss and seed stitches.

close-up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures.

combining certain increases, which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric, with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace, a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace.

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop-stitch knitting technique.

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next, usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder, is key to cable knitting, producing an endless variety of cables, honeycombs, ropes, and aran sweater patterning.

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares, picking up their side edges, and knitting more squares to continue the piece.

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric.

color[edit] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn, but there are many ways to work in multiple colors.

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color (intarsia, for example), busy small-scale patterns of color (such as fair isle), or both (double knitting and slip-stitch color, for example).

hand knitting process[edit] a woman in the process of hand knitting (1904) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters.

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on, which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle.

provisional cast-ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast-on.

there are various methods employed to cast on, such as the "thumb method" (also known as "slingshot" or "long-tail" cast-ons), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will, when knitted, give a very loose edge ideal for "picking up stitches" and knitting a border; the "double needle method" (also known as "knit-on" or "cable cast-on"), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then "knitted on", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border; and many more.

most western-style hand knitters follow either the english style (in which the yarn is held in the right hand) or the continental style (in which the yarn is held in the left hand).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting.

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting.

a third method, called combination knitting, goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch.

[18] once the hand knitted piece is finished, the remaining live stitches are "cast off".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing, especially larger ones like sweaters, the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces, with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together.

seamless knitting, where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece, is also possible.

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best-known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques.

smaller items, such as socks and hats, are usually knit in one piece on double-pointed needles or circular needles.

(see circular knitting.)

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting.

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for hand-knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins (hanks), and it may also be wound on spools or cones.

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color; skeins from different dye-lots, even if very similar in color, are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together.

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online.

otherwise, knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier.

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles, whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles.

hence, thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches, and therefore less time, to knit up a given garment.

in the british commonwealth (outside north america) yarns are measured as 1ply, 2ply, 3ply, 4ply, 5ply, 8ply (or double knit),10ply and 12ply (triple knit).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn (top) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center (bottom).

the latter is better for knitting, since the yarn is much less likely to tangle.

before knitting, the knitter will typically transform a hank/skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

when knitting, some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar-lid.

a yarn's usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors, such as its loft (its ability to trap air), its resilience (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its hand (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its hairiness (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and of course its look, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features.

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects, so there is no one "best" yarn.

the resilience and propensity to (un)twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand-knitting.

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit, whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches, in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch.

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition, corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn.

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for knitting, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting.

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is, or braided or plied with another.

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes; conversely, a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design, such as a cable or lace pattern.

metal wire[edit] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines.

glass and wax[edit] close-up of "jitterbug" – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting, lost-wax casting, mold-making, and kiln-casting.

the process involves: knitting with wax strands[21] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat-tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out, thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools, the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece.

[22] tools[edit] the process of knitting has three basic tasks: the active (unsecured) stitches must be held so they don't drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric, usually through active stitches, thus securing them.

in very simple cases, knitting can be done without tools, using only the fingers to do these tasks; however, knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles, knitting machines or rigid frames.

depending on their size and shape, the rigid frames are called stocking frames, knitting boards, knitting rings (also called knitting looms) or knitting spools (also known as knitting knobbies, knitting nancies, or corkers).

there is also a technique called knooking[23] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end, to hold the stitches while they're being worked.

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting, to measure and design knitted garments, or to make knitting easier or more comfortable.

needles[edit] main article: knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials.

there are three basic types of knitting needles (also called "knitting pins").

such needles are usually 10–16 inches (250–410 mm) long but, due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics, may be used to knit pieces significantly wider.

the diameter affects the size of stitches, which affects the gauge/tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric.

thus, a simple way to change gauge/tension is to use different needles, which is the basis of uneven knitting.

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters, there are several measurement systems, particularly those specific to the united states, the united kingdom and japan; a conversion table is given at knitting needle.

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials, but the most common materials are metals, wood, bamboo, and plastic.

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting, whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches.

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends.

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark.

double-pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes.

the second type of knitting needles are straight, double-pointed knitting needles (also called "dpns").

double-pointed needles are tapered at both ends, which allows them to be knit from either end.

dpns are typically used for circular knitting, especially smaller tube-shaped pieces such as sleeves, collars, and socks; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches.

the two tapered ends (typically 5 inches (130 mm) long) are rigid and straight, allowing for easy knitting; however, the two ends are connected by a flexible strand (usually nylon) that allows the two ends to be brought together.

circular needles are typically 24-60 inches long, and are usually used singly or in pairs; again, the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle.

the cables/cords are screwed into the needles, allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles.

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed.

circular knitting needles in different lengths, materials and sizes, including plastic, aluminum, steel and nickel-plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting, such as slip-stitch versions of double knitting.

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting.

when cabling a knitted piece, a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn.

cable needles are typically very short (a few inches), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted.

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern, the cable needle is moved, the stitches on it are worked by the other needles, then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist.

cable needles cable needles are a specific design, and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable.

largest circular knitting needles[edit] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall.

record[edit] julia hopson with world-record 3.5 meter (11'6") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson[24] of penzance in cornwall.

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6.5 centimeters (2½") in diameter and 3.5 meters (11'6") long.

ancillary tools[edit] some ancillary tools, also called notions, used by hand-knitters.

various tools have been developed to make hand-knitting easier.

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding/casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge-to-edge.

other tools such as knitting spools or pom-pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments.

for large or complex knitting patterns, it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way; therefore, several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch, including circular stitch markers, hanging markers, extra yarn and row counters.

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended; this is prevented by "point protectors" that cap the tapered ends.

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles; for this, special stress-relieving gloves are available.

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed.

finally, there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting, yarns and needles.

knitting styles/holds[edit] continental/german style[edit] main article: continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling.

norwegian style[edit] main article: norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style, the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle.

[25] russian style[edit] another variation on continental knitting, this style is achieved by "picking" up the yarn by moving the needle head into it.

in russian knitting, it is common to slip the first stitch of every row.

english style[edit] main article: english knitting english-style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand.

portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style[edit] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace-style hook, allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse (purl) side, e.g.

"inside out" compared to western knitting techniques.

this is an ancient style of knitting, which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula, during its occupation by muslims.

knitting techniques[edit] armenian[edit] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non-working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats.

double knitting[edit] main article: double knittinga technique used to create a flat, smooth, reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides, rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side.

mega knitting[edit] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter.

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting, except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles.

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless, automated knitting.

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted, meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle.

turn the left (non-working) hook to face away at all times; turn the right (working) hook toward you up whilst knitting (plain stitch) and away whilst purling.

mega knitting produces a chunky, bulky fabric or an open lacy weave, depending on the weight and type of yarn used.

[26] micro knitting[edit] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles.

[27][28][29] she has published bugknits: extreme knitting for hobbyists, artists and knitters (2009, blurb: isbn 978-1320025546).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0.4mm.

[30][31] short row[edit] main article: short row (knitting) in short row knitting, the work is turned before a row is fully knitted.

wrap and turn[edit] just before the work is turned, the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch, forming a “wrap.” later, this “wrap” is picked up and knitted into a stitch, concealing it from view.

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted, or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front, if it is to be purled, both of which maintain the proper (“tipped back”) orientation of the german double stitch.

twined knitting[edit] main article: twined knitting the technique, also known as two-end knitting, is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique.

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch.

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one-end knitting.

commercial applications[edit] industrially, metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres, catalytic converters for cars and many other uses.

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines.

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections.

gordana gelhausen, who appeared in season six of the television show project runway, is primarily a knit designer.

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors, fendi, and marc jacobs.

for individual hobbyists, websites such as etsy, big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale, in a way similar to ebay.

graffiti[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the 2000s, a practice called knitting graffiti, guerilla knitting, or yarn bombing—the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings—emerged in the u.s. and spread worldwide.

[32] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom.

for instance, dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large-scale public art installation in melbourne, australia for the big west arts festival in 2009. the work was vandalized the night of its completion.

[34] a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti".

the event is typically a multi-day event that caters to all knitters, crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community.

over the multi-day period, multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts, give away free exclusive patterns, provide classes, trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes.

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn, knitting and crochet goodies.

some local crawls also provide a knit-along (kal) or crochet-along (cal) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see.

[36][37][38][39] charity[edit] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st. louis, missouri, red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups.

girls and women hand knitted socks, sweaters, scarves, mittens, gloves, and hats for soldiers in crimea, the american civil war, and the boer wars; this practice continued in world war i, world war ii and the korean war, and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan.

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war.

in the historical projects, yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross.

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100% worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors.

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves.

prayer shawls, or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient, are donated to those experiencing loss or stress.

many knitters today hand knit and donate "chemo caps", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy.

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps.

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks.

[40] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers.

[41] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami, knitters without borders[42] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl-mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières (doctors without borders).

instead of hand knitting for charity, knitters are encouraged to donate a week's worth of disposable income, including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn.

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors.

as of september 2011, knitters without borders donors have contributed cad$1,062,217.

this outreach is described as, "afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people-to-people project that sends hand-knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters, vests, hats, mittens, and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan.

"[45] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find, as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation.

[46] health benefits[edit] the earliest image of circular knitting, from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting, along with other forms of needlework, provide several significant health benefits.

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress, pain and depression, which in turn strengthens the body's immune system,[47] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure, heart rate, help prevent illness, and have a calming effect.

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry, resulting in an increase in "feel good" hormones (i.e.

[47] hand knitting, along with other leisure activities, has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer's[48] and dementia by preventing memory loss.

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you, making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits.

[50] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links,[51] an organization founded in bath, england.

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others.

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other.

[2] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts.

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers.

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit.

[2] notable knitters[edit] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american-born, british-based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl-mcphee - is a writer, knitter, and knit-wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g. walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter, fashion designer, educator, and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british-born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer.

[52] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics' special mathematical and mechanical properties.

see also[edit] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references[edit] ^ "techniques with theresa, frog pond edition".

^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit" (spencer 1989:17).

warp knitted fabrics construction.

^ "knitting basics".

alamac american knits llc.

warp-knitting technology (2nd ed.).

shadow knitting.

slip-stitch knitting: color pattern the easy way.

alice starmore's book of fair isle knitting.

cables untangled: an exploration of cable knitting.

the complete book of traditional aran knitting.

"knitting is coding".

"how to do the knit stitch".

stitch 'n bitch: the knitter's handbook.

^ "knitting with glass – impossible!?".

^ "knitting glass (fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011)" (pdf).

^ "it's official: julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world".

knitwitspenzance.co.uk.

^ "the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them)".

allfreeknitting.com.

"anthea crome: world's smallest knitwear".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"seventy stitches to the inch: althea crome's tiny knits".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"knitters turn to graffiti artists with 'yarnbombing'".

"the graffiti knitting epidemic".

"artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork".

"a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti"".

"knitters without borders".

"knitting and crochet offer long-term health benefits".

^ "knitting can keep alzheimer's at bay".

the principles of knitting: methods and techniques of hand knitting.

"knitting".

a history of hand knitting.

knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide.

mary thomas's knitting book.

knitting without tears.

knitknit: profiles and projects from knitting's new wave.

(2008) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner.

(1981) elizabeth zimmermann's knitter's almanac.

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that?

isbn 978-1482748048 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting.

look up knitting in wiktionary, the free dictionary.

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article "knitting".

craftyarncouncil.com, relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge.

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting "knitting".

ravelry - a yarn-working social network (from their about page: "ravelry is an inclusive, friendly website for knitters, crocheters, spinners, weavers, and dyers".

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette/stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding/casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop-stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip-stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee (inventor) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl-mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g. walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch 'n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=knitting&oldid=1149831060" categories: knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

2weft and warp knitting [ 3 ] 1 .

3knit and purl stitches 1 .

4differences between knitting and crocheting 1 .

2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1largest circular knitting needles 6 .

2ancillary tools 7knitting styles / holds toggle knitting styles / holds subsection 7 .

3portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8 .

2double knitting 8 .

4mega knitting 8 .

5micro knitting 8 .

7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া башҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어ह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ ್ ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn " knit " redirects here .

for other uses , see knitting ( disambiguation ).

find sources : " knitting " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( december 2021 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches : knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns .

knitting may be done by hand or by machine .

knitting creates stitches : loops of yarn in a row , either flat or in the round ( tubular ).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time .

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows .

differences in yarn ( varying in fibre type , weight , uniformity and twist ), needle size , and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties , including color , texture , thickness , heat retention , water resistance , and integrity .

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch .

structure [ edit ] courses and wales [ edit ] structure of stockinette stitch , a common weave in knitted fabric .

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches .

like weaving , knitting is a technique for producing a two - dimensional fabric made from a one - dimensional yarn or thread .

by contrast , the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path ( a course ), forming symmetric loops ( also called bights ) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn .

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics .

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern , knitted garments can stretch as much as 500 %.

for this reason , knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer ' s motions , such as socks and hosiery .

knitted garments are often more form - fitting than woven garments , since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body ' s outline more closely ; by contrast , curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts , flares , gussets and gores , the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further .

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams , as in the heel of a sock ; the effect of darts , flares , etc .

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting , which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric .

if they are not secured , the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled ; this is known as ripping out , unravelling knitting , or humorously , frogging ( because you ' rip it ', this sounds like a frog croaking : ' rib - bit ').

[ 2 ] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric , a method for casting on is used ; to secure the final stitches in a wale , one uses a method of binding / casting off .

during knitting , the active stitches are secured mechanically , either from individual hooks ( in knitting machines ) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand - knitting .

basic pattern of warp knitting .

weft and warp knitting [ 3 ][ edit ] see also : warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting : weft knitting and warp knitting .

[ 4 ] in the more common weft knitting , the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn .

in warp knitting , the wales and courses run roughly parallel .

in weft knitting , the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn , by adding stitches to each wale in turn , moving across the fabric as in a raster scan .

by contrast , in warp knitting , one yarn is required for every wale .

[ 3 ] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales , warp knitting is typically done by machine , whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine .

[ 5 ] warp - knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs , and are commonly used in lingerie .

[ 6 ] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft - knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns , usually to produce interesting color patterns .

g ., a red apple on a field of green ; in that case , the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time .

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously ( e .

in the knit stitch on the left , the next ( red ) loop passes through the previous ( yellow ) loop from below , whereas in the purl stitch ( right ), the next stitch enters from above .

thus , a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other , and vice versa .

knit and purl stitches [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types .

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row ; this produces ' stockinette ' stitch .

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit , consistent with ' garter ' stitch .

if the former , the stitch is denoted as a ' knit stitch ' or a ' plain stitch ;' if the latter , as a ' purl stitch '.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side .

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect ; the knit stitches look like ' v ' s stacked vertically , whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric .

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as " pixels "; however , such pixels are usually rectangular , rather than square , depending on the gauge / tension of the knitting .

individual stitches , or rows of stitches , may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop ( an elongated stitch ), which is the basis for uneven knitting : a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect .

in the simplest of hand - knitted fabrics , every row of stitches are all knit ( or all purl ); this creates a garter stitch fabric .

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern / stocking stitch .

vertical stripes ( ribbing ) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches .

for example , a common choice is 2x2 ribbing , in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches , etc .

horizontal striping ( welting ) is also possible , by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches .

checkerboard patterns ( basketweave ) are also possible , the smallest of which is known as seed / moss stitch : the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row .

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row , such as in stockinette / stocking stitch , have a tendency to curl — top and bottom curl toward the front ( or knitted side ) while the sides curl toward the back ( or purled side ); by contrast , those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically ( such as ribbing , garter stitch or seed / moss stitch ) have more texture and tend to lie flat .

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede , whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward , giving the fabric more stretchability .

thus , the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible , since the neighboring knit wales come forward .

conversely , rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches .

this is the basis of shadow knitting , in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions .

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted , dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric , e .

the merged stitches need not be from the same row ; for example , a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows , producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric .

not every stitch in a row need be knitted ; some may be ' missed ' ( unknitted and passed to the active needle ) and knitted on a subsequent row .

this is known as slip - stitch knitting .

[ 8 ] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones .

for example , a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts .

mosaic knitting is a form of slip - stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns ; mosaic - knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair - isle knitting .

this is known as drop - stitch knitting , and produces a vertical ladder of see - through holes in the fabric , corresponding to where the wale had been .

differences between knitting and crocheting [ edit ] for many beginners , telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky .

[ clarification needed ] when knitting , the stitches form a shape that is similar to a " v ", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together .

when knitting , a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles .

often times , crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting .

right - and left - plaited stitches [ edit ] see also : plaited stitch ( knitting ) the stitches on the right are right - plaited , whereas the stitches on the left are left - plaited .

within limits , an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches , whether they be knit or purl .

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted : usually once if at all , but sometimes twice and ( very rarely ) thrice .

hand - knitters generally produce right - plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops , i .

by contrast , the left - plaited stitch is generally formed by hand - knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way , rather than by any change in the needle .

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire .

edges and joins between fabrics [ edit ] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast - on and bound / cast - off edges .

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric , e .

g ., for button holes , by binding / casting off and re - casting on again ( horizontal ) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately .

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery - based grafting methods , most commonly the kitchener stitch .

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric ; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac , in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern .

illustration of cable knitting .

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches .

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit , the wales can be made to cross .

cables , increases , and lace [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches ordinarily , stitches are knitted in the same order in every row , and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric .

however , this need not be so , since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another , forming a cable pattern .

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together , making it denser and less elastic ;[ 10 ] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling .

[ 11 ] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting , with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards ; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric .

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale , such as appear in celtic knots , but these are inexact approximations .

however , such circular wales are possible using swiss darning , a form of embroidery , or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric .

in lace knitting , the pattern is formed by making small , stable holes in the fabric , generally with yarn overs .

this is used to great effect in lace knitting , which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes , rather than with the stitches themselves .

[ 12 ] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic ; for example , some shetland " wedding - ring " shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring .

by combining increases and decreases , it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical , even in weft knitting .

this is the basis for bias knitting , and can be used for visual effect , similar to the direction of a brush - stroke in oil painting .

ornamentations and additions [ edit ] various point - like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric .

long loops can also be drawn out and secured , forming a " shaggy " texture to the fabric ; this is known as loop knitting .

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery ; if the embroidery resembles knitting , it is often called swiss darning .

various closures for the garments , such as frogs and buttons can be added ; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment , rather than cut .

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique .

for example , differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture .

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit .

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth , as is done in tufting and " weaving " ( also known as " couching ").

history and culture [ edit ] main article : history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan , to knot .

[ 13 ] the exact origins of knitting are unknown , the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat , now part of cairo .

[ 14 ] nålebinding ( danish : literally " binding with a needle " or " needle - binding ") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet .

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century ( tournai in 1429 , barcelona in 1496 ).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization ( not necessarily a guild ) of knitters from 1268 .

[ 15 ] the occupation : " cap knitter " describes margaret yeo , of london , in 1473 .

[ 16 ] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame , an early form of knitting machine , knitting " by hand " became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber .

similar to quilting , spinning , and needlepoint , hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy .

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop , richard rutt , authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting ( batsford , 1987 ).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art ( university of southampton ).

properties of fabrics [ edit ] main article : knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch , the most basic weft - knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex .

unlike woven fabrics , where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically , yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row , as with the red strand in the diagram at left , in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it .

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern , a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions .

many modern stretchy garments , even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch , also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns .

close - up of front of stockinette stitch close - up of back of stockinette stitch , also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric ( as in the diagram , and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern ) has a definite " right side " and " wrong side ".

stitches can be worked from either side , and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the " wrong side " stitches , known as purl stitches , either in columns ( ribbing ), rows ( garter , welting ), or more complex patterns .

different combinations of knit and purl stitches , along with more advanced techniques , generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency , from gauzy to very dense , from highly stretchy to relatively stiff , from flat to tightly curled , and so on .

close - up of knitting texture [ edit ] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch — as seen , though very small , in machine - made stockings and t - shirts — which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches , and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl .

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches , including garter stitch , ribbing , and moss and seed stitches .

close - up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures .

combining certain increases , which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric , with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace , a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace .

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop - stitch knitting technique .

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next , usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder , is key to cable knitting , producing an endless variety of cables , honeycombs , ropes , and aran sweater patterning .

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares , picking up their side edges , and knitting more squares to continue the piece .

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric .

color [ edit ] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn , but there are many ways to work in multiple colors .

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color ( intarsia , for example ), busy small - scale patterns of color ( such as fair isle ), or both ( double knitting and slip - stitch color , for example ).

hand knitting process [ edit ] a woman in the process of hand knitting ( 1904 ) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters .

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on , which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle .

provisional cast - ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast - on .

there are various methods employed to cast on , such as the " thumb method " ( also known as " slingshot " or " long - tail " cast - ons ), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will , when knitted , give a very loose edge ideal for " picking up stitches " and knitting a border ; the " double needle method " ( also known as " knit - on " or " cable cast - on "), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then " knitted on ", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border ; and many more .

most western - style hand knitters follow either the english style ( in which the yarn is held in the right hand ) or the continental style ( in which the yarn is held in the left hand ).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting .

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting .

a third method , called combination knitting , goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch .

[ 18 ] once the hand knitted piece is finished , the remaining live stitches are " cast off ".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing , especially larger ones like sweaters , the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces , with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together .

seamless knitting , where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece , is also possible .

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best - known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques .

smaller items , such as socks and hats , are usually knit in one piece on double - pointed needles or circular needles .

( see circular knitting .)

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting .

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for hand - knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins ( hanks ), and it may also be wound on spools or cones .

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color ; skeins from different dye - lots , even if very similar in color , are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together .

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project , additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online .

otherwise , knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier .

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles , whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles .

hence , thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches , and therefore less time , to knit up a given garment .

in the british commonwealth ( outside north america ) yarns are measured as 1ply , 2ply , 3ply , 4ply , 5ply , 8ply ( or double knit ), 10ply and 12ply ( triple knit ).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn ( top ) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center ( bottom ).

the latter is better for knitting , since the yarn is much less likely to tangle .

before knitting , the knitter will typically transform a hank / skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball ; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

when knitting , some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns ; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar - lid .

a yarn ' s usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors , such as its loft ( its ability to trap air ), its resilience ( elasticity under tension ), its washability and colorfastness , its hand ( its feel , particularly softness vs .

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects , so there is no one " best " yarn .

the resilience and propensity to ( un ) twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand - knitting .

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension ; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit , whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches , in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch .

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition , corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn .

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for knitting , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting .

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is , or braided or plied with another .

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects , such as diagonal stripes ; conversely , a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design , such as a cable or lace pattern .

metal wire [ edit ] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines .

glass and wax [ edit ] close - up of " jitterbug " – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting , lost - wax casting , mold - making , and kiln - casting .

the process involves : knitting with wax strands [ 21 ] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat - tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out , thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools , the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece .

[ 22 ] tools [ edit ] the process of knitting has three basic tasks : the active ( unsecured ) stitches must be held so they don ' t drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric , usually through active stitches , thus securing them .

in very simple cases , knitting can be done without tools , using only the fingers to do these tasks ; however , knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles , knitting machines or rigid frames .

depending on their size and shape , the rigid frames are called stocking frames , knitting boards , knitting rings ( also called knitting looms ) or knitting spools ( also known as knitting knobbies , knitting nancies , or corkers ).

there is also a technique called knooking [ 23 ] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end , to hold the stitches while they ' re being worked .

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting , to measure and design knitted garments , or to make knitting easier or more comfortable .

needles [ edit ] main article : knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials .

there are three basic types of knitting needles ( also called " knitting pins ").

such needles are usually 10 – 16 inches ( 250 – 410 mm ) long but , due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics , may be used to knit pieces significantly wider .

the diameter affects the size of stitches , which affects the gauge / tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric .

thus , a simple way to change gauge / tension is to use different needles , which is the basis of uneven knitting .

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters , there are several measurement systems , particularly those specific to the united states , the united kingdom and japan ; a conversion table is given at knitting needle .

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials , but the most common materials are metals , wood , bamboo , and plastic .

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently ; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting , whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches .

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends .

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark .

double - pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes .

the second type of knitting needles are straight , double - pointed knitting needles ( also called " dpns ").

double - pointed needles are tapered at both ends , which allows them to be knit from either end .

dpns are typically used for circular knitting , especially smaller tube - shaped pieces such as sleeves , collars , and socks ; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches .

the two tapered ends ( typically 5 inches ( 130 mm ) long ) are rigid and straight , allowing for easy knitting ; however , the two ends are connected by a flexible strand ( usually nylon ) that allows the two ends to be brought together .

circular needles are typically 24 - 60 inches long , and are usually used singly or in pairs ; again , the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle .

the cables / cords are screwed into the needles , allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles .

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed .

circular knitting needles in different lengths , materials and sizes , including plastic , aluminum , steel and nickel - plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting , such as slip - stitch versions of double knitting .

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting .

when cabling a knitted piece , a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn .

cable needles are typically very short ( a few inches ), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted .

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern , the cable needle is moved , the stitches on it are worked by the other needles , then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist .

cable needles cable needles are a specific design , and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable .

largest circular knitting needles [ edit ] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall .

5 meter ( 11 ' 6 ") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson [ 24 ] of penzance in cornwall .

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6 .

ancillary tools [ edit ] some ancillary tools , also called notions , used by hand - knitters .

various tools have been developed to make hand - knitting easier .

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding / casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge - to - edge .

other tools such as knitting spools or pom - pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments .

for large or complex knitting patterns , it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way ; therefore , several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch , including circular stitch markers , hanging markers , extra yarn and row counters .

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended ; this is prevented by " point protectors " that cap the tapered ends .

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles ; for this , special stress - relieving gloves are available .

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed .

finally , there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting , yarns and needles .

knitting styles / holds [ edit ] continental / german style [ edit ] main article : continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling .

norwegian style [ edit ] main article : norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style , the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle .

[ 25 ] russian style [ edit ] another variation on continental knitting , this style is achieved by " picking " up the yarn by moving the needle head into it .

in russian knitting , it is common to slip the first stitch of every row .

english style [ edit ] main article : english knitting english - style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand .

portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style [ edit ] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace - style hook , allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse ( purl ) side , e .

inside out " compared to western knitting techniques .

this is an ancient style of knitting , which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula , during its occupation by muslims .

knitting techniques [ edit ] armenian [ edit ] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non - working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats .

double knitting [ edit ] main article : double knittinga technique used to create a flat , smooth , reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides , rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side .

mega knitting [ edit ] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter .

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting , except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles .

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless , automated knitting .

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted , meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle .

turn the left ( non - working ) hook to face away at all times ; turn the right ( working ) hook toward you up whilst knitting ( plain stitch ) and away whilst purling .

mega knitting produces a chunky , bulky fabric or an open lacy weave , depending on the weight and type of yarn used .

[ 26 ] micro knitting [ edit ] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles .

[ 27 ][ 28 ][ 29 ] she has published bugknits : extreme knitting for hobbyists , artists and knitters ( 2009 , blurb : isbn 978 - 1320025546 ).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0 .

[ 30 ][ 31 ] short row [ edit ] main article : short row ( knitting ) in short row knitting , the work is turned before a row is fully knitted .

wrap and turn [ edit ] just before the work is turned , the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch , forming a “ wrap .” later , this “ wrap ” is picked up and knitted into a stitch , concealing it from view .

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted , or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front , if it is to be purled , both of which maintain the proper (“ tipped back ”) orientation of the german double stitch .

twined knitting [ edit ] main article : twined knitting the technique , also known as two - end knitting , is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique .

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch .

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one - end knitting .

commercial applications [ edit ] industrially , metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres , catalytic converters for cars and many other uses .

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines .

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections .

gordana gelhausen , who appeared in season six of the television show project runway , is primarily a knit designer .

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors , fendi , and marc jacobs .

for individual hobbyists , websites such as etsy , big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale , in a way similar to ebay .

graffiti [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the 2000s , a practice called knitting graffiti , guerilla knitting , or yarn bombing — the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings — emerged in the u .

[ 32 ] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom .

for instance , dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large - scale public art installation in melbourne , australia for the big west arts festival in 2009 .

[ 34 ] a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti ".

the event is typically a multi - day event that caters to all knitters , crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community .

over the multi - day period , multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts , give away free exclusive patterns , provide classes , trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes .

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn , knitting and crochet goodies .

some local crawls also provide a knit - along ( kal ) or crochet - along ( cal ) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see .

[ 36 ][ 37 ][ 38 ][ 39 ] charity [ edit ] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st .

louis , missouri , red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups .

girls and women hand knitted socks , sweaters , scarves , mittens , gloves , and hats for soldiers in crimea , the american civil war , and the boer wars ; this practice continued in world war i , world war ii and the korean war , and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan .

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war .

in the historical projects , yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services ; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross .

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners ; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100 % worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors .

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves .

prayer shawls , or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient , are donated to those experiencing loss or stress .

many knitters today hand knit and donate " chemo caps ", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy .

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps .

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks .

[ 40 ] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers .

[ 41 ] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami , knitters without borders [ 42 ] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl - mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières ( doctors without borders ).

instead of hand knitting for charity , knitters are encouraged to donate a week ' s worth of disposable income , including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn .

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors .

as of september 2011 , knitters without borders donors have contributed cad $ 1 , 062 , 217 .

this outreach is described as , " afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people - to - people project that sends hand - knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters , vests , hats , mittens , and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan .

"[ 45 ] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find , as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation .

[ 46 ] health benefits [ edit ] the earliest image of circular knitting , from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting , along with other forms of needlework , provide several significant health benefits .

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress , pain and depression , which in turn strengthens the body ' s immune system ,[ 47 ] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure , heart rate , help prevent illness , and have a calming effect .

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry , resulting in an increase in " feel good " hormones ( i .

[ 47 ] hand knitting , along with other leisure activities , has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer ' s [ 48 ] and dementia by preventing memory loss .

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you , making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits .

[ 50 ] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links ,[ 51 ] an organization founded in bath , england .

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction ; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others .

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other .

[ 2 ] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts .

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers .

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit .

[ 2 ] notable knitters [ edit ] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american - born , british - based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl - mcphee - is a writer , knitter , and knit - wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g .

walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter , fashion designer , educator , and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british - born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer .

[ 52 ] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics ' special mathematical and mechanical properties .

see also [ edit ] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references [ edit ] ^ " techniques with theresa , frog pond edition ".

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit " ( spencer 1989 : 17 ).

warp knitted fabrics construction .

^ " knitting basics ".

alamac american knits llc .

warp - knitting technology ( 2nd ed .

shadow knitting .

slip - stitch knitting : color pattern the easy way .

alice starmore ' s book of fair isle knitting .

cables untangled : an exploration of cable knitting .

the complete book of traditional aran knitting .

knitting is coding ".

how to do the knit stitch ".

stitch ' n bitch : the knitter ' s handbook .

^ " knitting with glass – impossible !

^ " knitting glass ( fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011 )" ( pdf ).

^ " it ' s official : julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world ".

knitwitspenzance .

^ " the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them )".

allfreeknitting .

anthea crome : world ' s smallest knitwear ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

seventy stitches to the inch : althea crome ' s tiny knits ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

knitters turn to graffiti artists with ' yarnbombing '".

the graffiti knitting epidemic ".

artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork ".

a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti "".

knitters without borders ".

knitting and crochet offer long - term health benefits ".

^ " knitting can keep alzheimer ' s at bay ".

the principles of knitting : methods and techniques of hand knitting .

knitting ".

a history of hand knitting .

knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide .

mary thomas ' s knitting book .

knitting without tears .

knitknit : profiles and projects from knitting ' s new wave .

( 2008 ) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner .

( 1981 ) elizabeth zimmermann ' s knitter ' s almanac .

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that ?

isbn 978 - 1482748048 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting .

look up knitting in wiktionary , the free dictionary .

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article " knitting ".

com , relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge .

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting " knitting ".

ravelry - a yarn - working social network ( from their about page : " ravelry is an inclusive , friendly website for knitters , crocheters , spinners , weavers , and dyers ". "

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette / stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding / casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop - stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip - stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee ( inventor ) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl - mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g .

walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch ' n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from " https :// en .

title = knitting & oldid = 1149831060 " categories : knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1structure toggle structure subsection 1.1courses and wales 1.2weft and warp knitting[3] 1.3knit and purl stitches 1.4differences between knitting and crocheting 1.5right- and left-plaited stitches 1.6edges and joins between fabrics 1.7cables, increases, and lace 1.8ornamentations and additions 2history and culture 3properties of fabrics toggle properties of fabrics subsection 3.1texture 3.2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1yarn 5.2metal wire 5.3glass and wax 6tools toggle tools subsection 6.1needles 6.1.1largest circular knitting needles 6.1.2record 6.2ancillary tools 7knitting styles/holds toggle knitting styles/holds subsection 7.1continental/german style 7.1.1norwegian style 7.1.2russian style 7.2english style 7.3portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8.1armenian 8.2double knitting 8.3fair isle 8.4mega knitting 8.5micro knitting 8.6short row 8.6.1wrap and turn 8.6.2german short row 8.6.3japanese short row 8.7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাбашҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어हिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn "knit" redirects here.

for other uses, see knitting (disambiguation).

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "knitting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (december 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches: knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns.

knitting may be done by hand or by machine.

knitting creates stitches: loops of yarn in a row, either flat or in the round (tubular).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time.

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows.

differences in yarn (varying in fibre type, weight, uniformity and twist), needle size, and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties, including color, texture, thickness, heat retention, water resistance, and integrity.

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch.

structure[edit] courses and wales[edit] structure of stockinette stitch, a common weave in knitted fabric.

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches.

like weaving, knitting is a technique for producing a two-dimensional fabric made from a one-dimensional yarn or thread.

by contrast, the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path (a course), forming symmetric loops (also called bights) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn.

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics.

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%.

for this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer's motions, such as socks and hosiery.

knitted garments are often more form-fitting than woven garments, since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body's outline more closely; by contrast, curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts, flares, gussets and gores, the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further.

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc.

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting, which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric.

if they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled; this is known as ripping out, unravelling knitting, or humorously, frogging (because you 'rip it', this sounds like a frog croaking: 'rib-bit').

[2] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric, a method for casting on is used; to secure the final stitches in a wale, one uses a method of binding/casting off.

during knitting, the active stitches are secured mechanically, either from individual hooks (in knitting machines) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand-knitting.

basic pattern of warp knitting.

weft and warp knitting[3][edit] see also: warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting.

[4] in the more common weft knitting, the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn.

in warp knitting, the wales and courses run roughly parallel.

in weft knitting, the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn, by adding stitches to each wale in turn, moving across the fabric as in a raster scan.

by contrast, in warp knitting, one yarn is required for every wale.

[3] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales, warp knitting is typically done by machine, whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine.

[5] warp-knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs, and are commonly used in lingerie.

[6] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft-knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns, usually to produce interesting color patterns.

in intarsia, the yarns are used in well-segregated regions, e.g., a red apple on a field of green; in that case, the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time.

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously (e.g., two socks).

in the knit stitch on the left, the next (red) loop passes through the previous (yellow) loop from below, whereas in the purl stitch (right), the next stitch enters from above.

thus, a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other, and vice versa.

knit and purl stitches[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types.

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row; this produces 'stockinette' stitch.

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit, consistent with 'garter' stitch.

if the former, the stitch is denoted as a 'knit stitch' or a 'plain stitch;' if the latter, as a 'purl stitch'.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side.

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect; the knit stitches look like 'v's stacked vertically, whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric.

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as "pixels"; however, such pixels are usually rectangular, rather than square, depending on the gauge/tension of the knitting.

individual stitches, or rows of stitches, may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop (an elongated stitch), which is the basis for uneven knitting: a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect.

in the simplest of hand-knitted fabrics, every row of stitches are all knit (or all purl); this creates a garter stitch fabric.

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern/stocking stitch.

vertical stripes (ribbing) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches.

for example, a common choice is 2x2 ribbing, in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches, etc.

horizontal striping (welting) is also possible, by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches.

checkerboard patterns (basketweave) are also possible, the smallest of which is known as seed/moss stitch: the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row.

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row, such as in stockinette/stocking stitch, have a tendency to curl—top and bottom curl toward the front (or knitted side) while the sides curl toward the back (or purled side); by contrast, those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically (such as ribbing, garter stitch or seed/moss stitch) have more texture and tend to lie flat.

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede, whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward, giving the fabric more stretchability.

thus, the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible, since the neighboring knit wales come forward.

conversely, rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches.

this is the basis of shadow knitting, in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions.

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted, dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric, e.g., the lower leaves of a flower.

the merged stitches need not be from the same row; for example, a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows, producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric.

not every stitch in a row need be knitted; some may be 'missed' (unknitted and passed to the active needle) and knitted on a subsequent row.

this is known as slip-stitch knitting.

[8] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones.

for example, a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts.

mosaic knitting is a form of slip-stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns; mosaic-knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair-isle knitting.

this is known as drop-stitch knitting, and produces a vertical ladder of see-through holes in the fabric, corresponding to where the wale had been.

differences between knitting and crocheting[edit] for many beginners, telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky.

[clarification needed] when knitting, the stitches form a shape that is similar to a "v", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together.

when knitting, a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles.

often times, crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting.

right- and left-plaited stitches[edit] see also: plaited stitch (knitting) the stitches on the right are right-plaited, whereas the stitches on the left are left-plaited.

within limits, an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches, whether they be knit or purl.

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted: usually once if at all, but sometimes twice and (very rarely) thrice.

hand-knitters generally produce right-plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops, i.e., passing the needle through the initial stitch in an unusual way, but wrapping the yarn as usual.

by contrast, the left-plaited stitch is generally formed by hand-knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way, rather than by any change in the needle.

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire.

edges and joins between fabrics[edit] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast-on and bound/cast-off edges.

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric, e.g., for button holes, by binding/casting off and re-casting on again (horizontal) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately.

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery-based grafting methods, most commonly the kitchener stitch.

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac, in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern.

illustration of cable knitting.

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches.

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit, the wales can be made to cross.

cables, increases, and lace[edit] see also: list of knitting stitches ordinarily, stitches are knitted in the same order in every row, and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric.

however, this need not be so, since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another, forming a cable pattern.

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together, making it denser and less elastic;[10] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling.

[11] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting, with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric.

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale, such as appear in celtic knots, but these are inexact approximations.

however, such circular wales are possible using swiss darning, a form of embroidery, or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric.

in lace knitting, the pattern is formed by making small, stable holes in the fabric, generally with yarn overs.

this is used to great effect in lace knitting, which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes, rather than with the stitches themselves.

[12] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic; for example, some shetland "wedding-ring" shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring.

by combining increases and decreases, it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical, even in weft knitting.

this is the basis for bias knitting, and can be used for visual effect, similar to the direction of a brush-stroke in oil painting.

ornamentations and additions[edit] various point-like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric.

long loops can also be drawn out and secured, forming a "shaggy" texture to the fabric; this is known as loop knitting.

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery; if the embroidery resembles knitting, it is often called swiss darning.

various closures for the garments, such as frogs and buttons can be added; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment, rather than cut.

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique.

for example, differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture.

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit.

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth, as is done in tufting and "weaving" (also known as "couching").

history and culture[edit] main article: history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan, to knot.

[13] the exact origins of knitting are unknown, the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat, now part of cairo.

[14] nålebinding (danish: literally "binding with a needle" or "needle-binding") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet.

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century (tournai in 1429, barcelona in 1496).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization (not necessarily a guild) of knitters from 1268.

[15] the occupation: "cap knitter" describes margaret yeo, of london, in 1473.

[16] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame, an early form of knitting machine, knitting "by hand" became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber.

similar to quilting, spinning, and needlepoint, hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy.

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop, richard rutt, authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting (batsford, 1987).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art (university of southampton).

properties of fabrics[edit] main article: knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch, the most basic weft-knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex.

unlike woven fabrics, where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically, yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row, as with the red strand in the diagram at left, in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it.

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern, a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions.

many modern stretchy garments, even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch, also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns.

close-up of front of stockinette stitch close-up of back of stockinette stitch, also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric (as in the diagram, and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern) has a definite "right side" and "wrong side".

stitches can be worked from either side, and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the "wrong side" stitches, known as purl stitches, either in columns (ribbing), rows (garter, welting), or more complex patterns.

different combinations of knit and purl stitches, along with more advanced techniques, generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency, from gauzy to very dense, from highly stretchy to relatively stiff, from flat to tightly curled, and so on.

close-up of knitting texture[edit] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch—as seen, though very small, in machine-made stockings and t-shirts—which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches, and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl.

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches, including garter stitch, ribbing, and moss and seed stitches.

close-up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures.

combining certain increases, which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric, with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace, a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace.

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop-stitch knitting technique.

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next, usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder, is key to cable knitting, producing an endless variety of cables, honeycombs, ropes, and aran sweater patterning.

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares, picking up their side edges, and knitting more squares to continue the piece.

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric.

color[edit] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn, but there are many ways to work in multiple colors.

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color (intarsia, for example), busy small-scale patterns of color (such as fair isle), or both (double knitting and slip-stitch color, for example).

hand knitting process[edit] a woman in the process of hand knitting (1904) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters.

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on, which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle.

provisional cast-ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast-on.

there are various methods employed to cast on, such as the "thumb method" (also known as "slingshot" or "long-tail" cast-ons), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will, when knitted, give a very loose edge ideal for "picking up stitches" and knitting a border; the "double needle method" (also known as "knit-on" or "cable cast-on"), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then "knitted on", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border; and many more.

most western-style hand knitters follow either the english style (in which the yarn is held in the right hand) or the continental style (in which the yarn is held in the left hand).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting.

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting.

a third method, called combination knitting, goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch.

[18] once the hand knitted piece is finished, the remaining live stitches are "cast off".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing, especially larger ones like sweaters, the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces, with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together.

seamless knitting, where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece, is also possible.

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best-known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques.

smaller items, such as socks and hats, are usually knit in one piece on double-pointed needles or circular needles.

(see circular knitting.)

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting.

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for hand-knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins (hanks), and it may also be wound on spools or cones.

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color; skeins from different dye-lots, even if very similar in color, are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together.

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online.

otherwise, knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier.

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles, whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles.

hence, thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches, and therefore less time, to knit up a given garment.

in the british commonwealth (outside north america) yarns are measured as 1ply, 2ply, 3ply, 4ply, 5ply, 8ply (or double knit),10ply and 12ply (triple knit).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn (top) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center (bottom).

the latter is better for knitting, since the yarn is much less likely to tangle.

before knitting, the knitter will typically transform a hank/skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

when knitting, some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar-lid.

a yarn's usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors, such as its loft (its ability to trap air), its resilience (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its hand (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its hairiness (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and of course its look, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features.

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects, so there is no one "best" yarn.

the resilience and propensity to (un)twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand-knitting.

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit, whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches, in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch.

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition, corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn.

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for knitting, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting.

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is, or braided or plied with another.

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes; conversely, a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design, such as a cable or lace pattern.

metal wire[edit] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines.

glass and wax[edit] close-up of "jitterbug" – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting, lost-wax casting, mold-making, and kiln-casting.

the process involves: knitting with wax strands[21] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat-tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out, thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools, the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece.

[22] tools[edit] the process of knitting has three basic tasks: the active (unsecured) stitches must be held so they don't drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric, usually through active stitches, thus securing them.

in very simple cases, knitting can be done without tools, using only the fingers to do these tasks; however, knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles, knitting machines or rigid frames.

depending on their size and shape, the rigid frames are called stocking frames, knitting boards, knitting rings (also called knitting looms) or knitting spools (also known as knitting knobbies, knitting nancies, or corkers).

there is also a technique called knooking[23] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end, to hold the stitches while they're being worked.

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting, to measure and design knitted garments, or to make knitting easier or more comfortable.

needles[edit] main article: knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials.

there are three basic types of knitting needles (also called "knitting pins").

such needles are usually 10–16 inches (250–410 mm) long but, due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics, may be used to knit pieces significantly wider.

the diameter affects the size of stitches, which affects the gauge/tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric.

thus, a simple way to change gauge/tension is to use different needles, which is the basis of uneven knitting.

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters, there are several measurement systems, particularly those specific to the united states, the united kingdom and japan; a conversion table is given at knitting needle.

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials, but the most common materials are metals, wood, bamboo, and plastic.

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting, whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches.

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends.

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark.

double-pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes.

the second type of knitting needles are straight, double-pointed knitting needles (also called "dpns").

double-pointed needles are tapered at both ends, which allows them to be knit from either end.

dpns are typically used for circular knitting, especially smaller tube-shaped pieces such as sleeves, collars, and socks; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches.

the two tapered ends (typically 5 inches (130 mm) long) are rigid and straight, allowing for easy knitting; however, the two ends are connected by a flexible strand (usually nylon) that allows the two ends to be brought together.

circular needles are typically 24-60 inches long, and are usually used singly or in pairs; again, the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle.

the cables/cords are screwed into the needles, allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles.

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed.

circular knitting needles in different lengths, materials and sizes, including plastic, aluminum, steel and nickel-plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting, such as slip-stitch versions of double knitting.

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting.

when cabling a knitted piece, a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn.

cable needles are typically very short (a few inches), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted.

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern, the cable needle is moved, the stitches on it are worked by the other needles, then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist.

cable needles cable needles are a specific design, and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable.

largest circular knitting needles[edit] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall.

record[edit] julia hopson with world-record 3.5 meter (11'6") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson[24] of penzance in cornwall.

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6.5 centimeters (2½") in diameter and 3.5 meters (11'6") long.

ancillary tools[edit] some ancillary tools, also called notions, used by hand-knitters.

various tools have been developed to make hand-knitting easier.

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding/casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge-to-edge.

other tools such as knitting spools or pom-pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments.

for large or complex knitting patterns, it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way; therefore, several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch, including circular stitch markers, hanging markers, extra yarn and row counters.

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended; this is prevented by "point protectors" that cap the tapered ends.

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles; for this, special stress-relieving gloves are available.

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed.

finally, there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting, yarns and needles.

knitting styles/holds[edit] continental/german style[edit] main article: continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling.

norwegian style[edit] main article: norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style, the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle.

[25] russian style[edit] another variation on continental knitting, this style is achieved by "picking" up the yarn by moving the needle head into it.

in russian knitting, it is common to slip the first stitch of every row.

english style[edit] main article: english knitting english-style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand.

portuguese/greek/incan/turkish style[edit] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace-style hook, allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse (purl) side, e.g.

"inside out" compared to western knitting techniques.

this is an ancient style of knitting, which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula, during its occupation by muslims.

knitting techniques[edit] armenian[edit] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non-working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats.

double knitting[edit] main article: double knittinga technique used to create a flat, smooth, reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides, rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side.

mega knitting[edit] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter.

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting, except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles.

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless, automated knitting.

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted, meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle.

turn the left (non-working) hook to face away at all times; turn the right (working) hook toward you up whilst knitting (plain stitch) and away whilst purling.

mega knitting produces a chunky, bulky fabric or an open lacy weave, depending on the weight and type of yarn used.

[26] micro knitting[edit] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles.

[27][28][29] she has published bugknits: extreme knitting for hobbyists, artists and knitters (2009, blurb: isbn 978-1320025546).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0.4mm.

[30][31] short row[edit] main article: short row (knitting) in short row knitting, the work is turned before a row is fully knitted.

wrap and turn[edit] just before the work is turned, the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch, forming a “wrap.” later, this “wrap” is picked up and knitted into a stitch, concealing it from view.

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted, or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front, if it is to be purled, both of which maintain the proper (“tipped back”) orientation of the german double stitch.

twined knitting[edit] main article: twined knitting the technique, also known as two-end knitting, is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique.

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch.

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one-end knitting.

commercial applications[edit] industrially, metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres, catalytic converters for cars and many other uses.

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines.

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections.

gordana gelhausen, who appeared in season six of the television show project runway, is primarily a knit designer.

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors, fendi, and marc jacobs.

for individual hobbyists, websites such as etsy, big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale, in a way similar to ebay.

graffiti[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the 2000s, a practice called knitting graffiti, guerilla knitting, or yarn bombing—the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings—emerged in the u.s. and spread worldwide.

[32] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom.

for instance, dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large-scale public art installation in melbourne, australia for the big west arts festival in 2009. the work was vandalized the night of its completion.

[34] a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti".

the event is typically a multi-day event that caters to all knitters, crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community.

over the multi-day period, multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts, give away free exclusive patterns, provide classes, trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes.

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn, knitting and crochet goodies.

some local crawls also provide a knit-along (kal) or crochet-along (cal) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see.

[36][37][38][39] charity[edit] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st. louis, missouri, red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups.

girls and women hand knitted socks, sweaters, scarves, mittens, gloves, and hats for soldiers in crimea, the american civil war, and the boer wars; this practice continued in world war i, world war ii and the korean war, and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan.

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war.

in the historical projects, yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross.

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100% worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors.

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves.

prayer shawls, or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient, are donated to those experiencing loss or stress.

many knitters today hand knit and donate "chemo caps", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy.

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps.

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks.

[40] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers.

[41] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami, knitters without borders[42] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl-mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières (doctors without borders).

instead of hand knitting for charity, knitters are encouraged to donate a week's worth of disposable income, including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn.

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors.

as of september 2011, knitters without borders donors have contributed cad$1,062,217.

this outreach is described as, "afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people-to-people project that sends hand-knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters, vests, hats, mittens, and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan.

"[45] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find, as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation.

[46] health benefits[edit] the earliest image of circular knitting, from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting, along with other forms of needlework, provide several significant health benefits.

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress, pain and depression, which in turn strengthens the body's immune system,[47] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure, heart rate, help prevent illness, and have a calming effect.

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry, resulting in an increase in "feel good" hormones (i.e.

[47] hand knitting, along with other leisure activities, has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer's[48] and dementia by preventing memory loss.

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you, making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits.

[50] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links,[51] an organization founded in bath, england.

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others.

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other.

[2] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts.

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers.

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit.

[2] notable knitters[edit] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american-born, british-based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl-mcphee - is a writer, knitter, and knit-wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g. walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter, fashion designer, educator, and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british-born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer.

[52] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics' special mathematical and mechanical properties.

see also[edit] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references[edit] ^ "techniques with theresa, frog pond edition".

^ a b c a wale, according to knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide, is "a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive (not necessarily all) knitting cycles.

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit" (spencer 1989:17).

warp knitted fabrics construction.

^ "knitting basics".

alamac american knits llc.

warp-knitting technology (2nd ed.).

shadow knitting.

slip-stitch knitting: color pattern the easy way.

alice starmore's book of fair isle knitting.

cables untangled: an exploration of cable knitting.

the complete book of traditional aran knitting.

"knitting is coding".

"how to do the knit stitch".

stitch 'n bitch: the knitter's handbook.

^ "knitting with glass – impossible!?".

^ "knitting glass (fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011)" (pdf).

^ "it's official: julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world".

knitwitspenzance.co.uk.

^ "the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them)".

allfreeknitting.com.

"anthea crome: world's smallest knitwear".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"seventy stitches to the inch: althea crome's tiny knits".

astounding knits!

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats.

"knitters turn to graffiti artists with 'yarnbombing'".

"the graffiti knitting epidemic".

"artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork".

"a new movie, shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by "knitted graffiti"".

"knitters without borders".

"knitting and crochet offer long-term health benefits".

^ "knitting can keep alzheimer's at bay".

the principles of knitting: methods and techniques of hand knitting.

"knitting".

a history of hand knitting.

knitting technology: a comprehensive handbook and practical guide.

mary thomas's knitting book.

knitting without tears.

knitknit: profiles and projects from knitting's new wave.

(2008) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner.

(1981) elizabeth zimmermann's knitter's almanac.

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that?

isbn 978-1482748048 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting.

look up knitting in wiktionary, the free dictionary.

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article "knitting".

craftyarncouncil.com, relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge.

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting "knitting".

ravelry - a yarn-working social network (from their about page: "ravelry is an inclusive, friendly website for knitters, crocheters, spinners, weavers, and dyers".

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette/stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding/casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop-stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip-stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee (inventor) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl-mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g. walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch 'n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=knitting&oldid=1149831060" categories: knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement knitting - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

2weft and warp knitting [ 3 ] 1 .

3knit and purl stitches 1 .

4differences between knitting and crocheting 1 .

2color 4hand knitting process 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1largest circular knitting needles 6 .

2ancillary tools 7knitting styles / holds toggle knitting styles / holds subsection 7 .

3portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style 8knitting techniques toggle knitting techniques subsection 8 .

2double knitting 8 .

4mega knitting 8 .

5micro knitting 8 .

7twined knitting 9commercial applications 10graffiti 11yarn crawl 12charity 13health benefits 14notable knitters 15see also 16references 17further reading 18external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents knitting 51 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া башҡортсабългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаcymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilge한국어ह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתಕನ ್ ನಡқазақшаkurdîкыргызчаlatinalietuviųmagyarмакедонскиမ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishsrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยtürkçeукраїнська中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia method of forming fabric from yarn " knit " redirects here .

for other uses , see knitting ( disambiguation ).

find sources : " knitting " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( december 2021 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) woman knitting video description of knitting a sock and the two basic stitches : knit and purl knitting is a method for production of textile fabrics by interlacing yarn loops with loops of the same or other yarns .

knitting may be done by hand or by machine .

knitting creates stitches : loops of yarn in a row , either flat or in the round ( tubular ).

there are usually many active stitches on the knitting needle at one time .

knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows .

differences in yarn ( varying in fibre type , weight , uniformity and twist ), needle size , and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties , including color , texture , thickness , heat retention , water resistance , and integrity .

a small sample of knitwork is known as a swatch .

structure [ edit ] courses and wales [ edit ] structure of stockinette stitch , a common weave in knitted fabric .

alternating wales of red and yellow knit stitches .

like weaving , knitting is a technique for producing a two - dimensional fabric made from a one - dimensional yarn or thread .

by contrast , the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path ( a course ), forming symmetric loops ( also called bights ) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn .

these meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics .

depending on the yarn and knitting pattern , knitted garments can stretch as much as 500 %.

for this reason , knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer ' s motions , such as socks and hosiery .

knitted garments are often more form - fitting than woven garments , since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body ' s outline more closely ; by contrast , curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts , flares , gussets and gores , the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further .

extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams , as in the heel of a sock ; the effect of darts , flares , etc .

thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting , which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric .

if they are not secured , the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled ; this is known as ripping out , unravelling knitting , or humorously , frogging ( because you ' rip it ', this sounds like a frog croaking : ' rib - bit ').

[ 2 ] to secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric , a method for casting on is used ; to secure the final stitches in a wale , one uses a method of binding / casting off .

during knitting , the active stitches are secured mechanically , either from individual hooks ( in knitting machines ) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand - knitting .

basic pattern of warp knitting .

weft and warp knitting [ 3 ][ edit ] see also : warp knitting there are two major varieties of knitting : weft knitting and warp knitting .

[ 4 ] in the more common weft knitting , the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn .

in warp knitting , the wales and courses run roughly parallel .

in weft knitting , the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn , by adding stitches to each wale in turn , moving across the fabric as in a raster scan .

by contrast , in warp knitting , one yarn is required for every wale .

[ 3 ] since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales , warp knitting is typically done by machine , whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine .

[ 5 ] warp - knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs , and are commonly used in lingerie .

[ 6 ] a modern knitting machine in the process of weft knitting weft - knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns , usually to produce interesting color patterns .

g ., a red apple on a field of green ; in that case , the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time .

double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously ( e .

in the knit stitch on the left , the next ( red ) loop passes through the previous ( yellow ) loop from below , whereas in the purl stitch ( right ), the next stitch enters from above .

thus , a knit stitch on one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other , and vice versa .

knit and purl stitches [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches two courses of red yarn illustrating two basic fabric types .

the lower red course is knit into the white row below it and is itself knit on the next row ; this produces ' stockinette ' stitch .

the upper red course is purled into the row below and then is knit , consistent with ' garter ' stitch .

if the former , the stitch is denoted as a ' knit stitch ' or a ' plain stitch ;' if the latter , as a ' purl stitch '.

the two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side .

the two types of stitches have a different visual effect ; the knit stitches look like ' v ' s stacked vertically , whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric .

patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as " pixels "; however , such pixels are usually rectangular , rather than square , depending on the gauge / tension of the knitting .

individual stitches , or rows of stitches , may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop ( an elongated stitch ), which is the basis for uneven knitting : a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect .

in the simplest of hand - knitted fabrics , every row of stitches are all knit ( or all purl ); this creates a garter stitch fabric .

alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette pattern / stocking stitch .

vertical stripes ( ribbing ) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches .

for example , a common choice is 2x2 ribbing , in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches , etc .

horizontal striping ( welting ) is also possible , by alternating rows of knit and purl stitches .

checkerboard patterns ( basketweave ) are also possible , the smallest of which is known as seed / moss stitch : the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row .

fabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row , such as in stockinette / stocking stitch , have a tendency to curl — top and bottom curl toward the front ( or knitted side ) while the sides curl toward the back ( or purled side ); by contrast , those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically ( such as ribbing , garter stitch or seed / moss stitch ) have more texture and tend to lie flat .

wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede , whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward , giving the fabric more stretchability .

thus , the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible , since the neighboring knit wales come forward .

conversely , rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches .

this is the basis of shadow knitting , in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions .

depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted , dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric , e .

the merged stitches need not be from the same row ; for example , a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows , producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric .

not every stitch in a row need be knitted ; some may be ' missed ' ( unknitted and passed to the active needle ) and knitted on a subsequent row .

this is known as slip - stitch knitting .

[ 8 ] the slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones .

for example , a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts .

mosaic knitting is a form of slip - stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns ; mosaic - knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as fair - isle knitting .

this is known as drop - stitch knitting , and produces a vertical ladder of see - through holes in the fabric , corresponding to where the wale had been .

differences between knitting and crocheting [ edit ] for many beginners , telling the difference between knitting and crocheting is very tricky .

[ clarification needed ] when knitting , the stitches form a shape that is similar to a " v ", while in crochet the stitches are knotted together .

when knitting , a pair of long needles is needed to be able to form the loops from one set of loop to another through the needles .

often times , crocheting is easier to work with at first as compared to knitting .

right - and left - plaited stitches [ edit ] see also : plaited stitch ( knitting ) the stitches on the right are right - plaited , whereas the stitches on the left are left - plaited .

within limits , an arbitrary number of twists may be added to new stitches , whether they be knit or purl .

both knit and purl stitches may be twisted : usually once if at all , but sometimes twice and ( very rarely ) thrice .

hand - knitters generally produce right - plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops , i .

by contrast , the left - plaited stitch is generally formed by hand - knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way , rather than by any change in the needle .

plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire .

edges and joins between fabrics [ edit ] the initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the cast - on and bound / cast - off edges .

vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric , e .

g ., for button holes , by binding / casting off and re - casting on again ( horizontal ) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately .

two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery - based grafting methods , most commonly the kitchener stitch .

new wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric ; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac , in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern .

illustration of cable knitting .

the central braid is formed from 2x2 ribbing in which the background is formed of purl stitches and the cables are each two wales of knit stitches .

by changing the order in which the stitches are knit , the wales can be made to cross .

cables , increases , and lace [ edit ] see also : list of knitting stitches ordinarily , stitches are knitted in the same order in every row , and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric .

however , this need not be so , since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another , forming a cable pattern .

cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together , making it denser and less elastic ;[ 10 ] aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling .

[ 11 ] arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting , with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards ; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric .

knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale , such as appear in celtic knots , but these are inexact approximations .

however , such circular wales are possible using swiss darning , a form of embroidery , or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric .

in lace knitting , the pattern is formed by making small , stable holes in the fabric , generally with yarn overs .

this is used to great effect in lace knitting , which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes , rather than with the stitches themselves .

[ 12 ] the large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic ; for example , some shetland " wedding - ring " shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring .

by combining increases and decreases , it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical , even in weft knitting .

this is the basis for bias knitting , and can be used for visual effect , similar to the direction of a brush - stroke in oil painting .

ornamentations and additions [ edit ] various point - like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric .

long loops can also be drawn out and secured , forming a " shaggy " texture to the fabric ; this is known as loop knitting .

additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery ; if the embroidery resembles knitting , it is often called swiss darning .

various closures for the garments , such as frogs and buttons can be added ; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment , rather than cut .

ornamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique .

for example , differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture .

separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit .

unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth , as is done in tufting and " weaving " ( also known as " couching ").

history and culture [ edit ] main article : history of knitting the word is derived from knot and ultimately from the old english cnyttan , to knot .

[ 13 ] the exact origins of knitting are unknown , the earliest known examples being cotton socks found in the remains of the city of fustat , now part of cairo .

[ 14 ] nålebinding ( danish : literally " binding with a needle " or " needle - binding ") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet .

the first commercial knitting guilds appear in western europe in the early fifteenth century ( tournai in 1429 , barcelona in 1496 ).

the guild of saint fiacre was founded in paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization ( not necessarily a guild ) of knitters from 1268 .

[ 15 ] the occupation : " cap knitter " describes margaret yeo , of london , in 1473 .

[ 16 ] with the invention in 1589 of the stocking frame , an early form of knitting machine , knitting " by hand " became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber .

similar to quilting , spinning , and needlepoint , hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy .

english roman catholic priest and former anglican bishop , richard rutt , authored a history of the craft in a history of hand knitting ( batsford , 1987 ).

his collection of books about knitting is now housed at the winchester school of art ( university of southampton ).

properties of fabrics [ edit ] main article : knitted fabric schematic of stockinette stitch , the most basic weft - knit fabric the topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex .

unlike woven fabrics , where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically , yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row , as with the red strand in the diagram at left , in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it .

because there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern , a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions .

many modern stretchy garments , even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch , also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns .

close - up of front of stockinette stitch close - up of back of stockinette stitch , also same appearance as reverse stockinette stitch the basic knitted fabric ( as in the diagram , and usually called a stocking or stockinette pattern ) has a definite " right side " and " wrong side ".

stitches can be worked from either side , and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the " wrong side " stitches , known as purl stitches , either in columns ( ribbing ), rows ( garter , welting ), or more complex patterns .

different combinations of knit and purl stitches , along with more advanced techniques , generate fabrics of considerably variable consistency , from gauzy to very dense , from highly stretchy to relatively stiff , from flat to tightly curled , and so on .

close - up of knitting texture [ edit ] the most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch — as seen , though very small , in machine - made stockings and t - shirts — which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches , and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl .

other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches , including garter stitch , ribbing , and moss and seed stitches .

close - up of ribbing some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures .

combining certain increases , which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric , with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace , a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace .

open vertical stripes can be created using the drop - stitch knitting technique .

changing the order of stitches from one row to the next , usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder , is key to cable knitting , producing an endless variety of cables , honeycombs , ropes , and aran sweater patterning .

entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares , picking up their side edges , and knitting more squares to continue the piece .

fair isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric .

color [ edit ] plenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn , but there are many ways to work in multiple colors .

more complicated techniques permit large fields of color ( intarsia , for example ), busy small - scale patterns of color ( such as fair isle ), or both ( double knitting and slip - stitch color , for example ).

hand knitting process [ edit ] a woman in the process of hand knitting ( 1904 ) there are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters .

a piece of hand knitting begins with the process of casting on , which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle .

provisional cast - ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast - on .

there are various methods employed to cast on , such as the " thumb method " ( also known as " slingshot " or " long - tail " cast - ons ), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will , when knitted , give a very loose edge ideal for " picking up stitches " and knitting a border ; the " double needle method " ( also known as " knit - on " or " cable cast - on "), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then " knitted on ", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border ; and many more .

most western - style hand knitters follow either the english style ( in which the yarn is held in the right hand ) or the continental style ( in which the yarn is held in the left hand ).

knitting through the front of a stitch is called western knitting .

going through the back of a stitch is called eastern knitting .

a third method , called combination knitting , goes through the front of a knit stitch and the back of a purl stitch .

[ 18 ] once the hand knitted piece is finished , the remaining live stitches are " cast off ".

in hand knitting certain articles of clothing , especially larger ones like sweaters , the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces , with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together .

seamless knitting , where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece , is also possible .

elizabeth zimmermann is probably the best - known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques .

smaller items , such as socks and hats , are usually knit in one piece on double - pointed needles or circular needles .

( see circular knitting .)

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for knitting .

knitting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for hand - knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins ( hanks ), and it may also be wound on spools or cones .

knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

the dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color ; skeins from different dye - lots , even if very similar in color , are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together .

if a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project , additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online .

otherwise , knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier .

thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles , whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles .

hence , thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches , and therefore less time , to knit up a given garment .

in the british commonwealth ( outside north america ) yarns are measured as 1ply , 2ply , 3ply , 4ply , 5ply , 8ply ( or double knit ), 10ply and 12ply ( triple knit ).

transformation of a hank of lavender silk yarn ( top ) into a ball in which the knitting yarn emerges from the center ( bottom ).

the latter is better for knitting , since the yarn is much less likely to tangle .

before knitting , the knitter will typically transform a hank / skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball ; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

when knitting , some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns ; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar - lid .

a yarn ' s usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors , such as its loft ( its ability to trap air ), its resilience ( elasticity under tension ), its washability and colorfastness , its hand ( its feel , particularly softness vs .

different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects , so there is no one " best " yarn .

the resilience and propensity to ( un ) twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand - knitting .

more resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension ; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit , whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches , in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch .

a key factor in knitting is stitch definition , corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn .

the two possible twists of yarn although knitting may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for knitting , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting .

a single spun yarn may be knitted as is , or braided or plied with another .

variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects , such as diagonal stripes ; conversely , a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design , such as a cable or lace pattern .

metal wire [ edit ] there are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines .

glass and wax [ edit ] close - up of " jitterbug " – knitted glass by carol milne knitted glass combines knitting , lost - wax casting , mold - making , and kiln - casting .

the process involves : knitting with wax strands [ 21 ] surrounding the knitted wax piece with a heat - tolerant refractory material removing the wax by melting it out , thus creating a mold placing the mold in a kiln where lead crystal glass melts into the mold after the mold cools , the mold material is removed to reveal the knitted glass piece .

[ 22 ] tools [ edit ] the process of knitting has three basic tasks : the active ( unsecured ) stitches must be held so they don ' t drop these stitches must be released sometime after they are secured new bights of yarn must be passed through the fabric , usually through active stitches , thus securing them .

in very simple cases , knitting can be done without tools , using only the fingers to do these tasks ; however , knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles , knitting machines or rigid frames .

depending on their size and shape , the rigid frames are called stocking frames , knitting boards , knitting rings ( also called knitting looms ) or knitting spools ( also known as knitting knobbies , knitting nancies , or corkers ).

there is also a technique called knooking [ 23 ] of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end , to hold the stitches while they ' re being worked .

other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting , to measure and design knitted garments , or to make knitting easier or more comfortable .

needles [ edit ] main article : knitting needle knitting needles in a variety of sizes and materials .

there are three basic types of knitting needles ( also called " knitting pins ").

such needles are usually 10 – 16 inches ( 250 – 410 mm ) long but , due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics , may be used to knit pieces significantly wider .

the diameter affects the size of stitches , which affects the gauge / tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric .

thus , a simple way to change gauge / tension is to use different needles , which is the basis of uneven knitting .

although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters , there are several measurement systems , particularly those specific to the united states , the united kingdom and japan ; a conversion table is given at knitting needle .

such knitting needles may be made out of any materials , but the most common materials are metals , wood , bamboo , and plastic .

different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently ; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting , whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches .

the knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends .

needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark .

double - pointed knitting needles in various materials and sizes .

the second type of knitting needles are straight , double - pointed knitting needles ( also called " dpns ").

double - pointed needles are tapered at both ends , which allows them to be knit from either end .

dpns are typically used for circular knitting , especially smaller tube - shaped pieces such as sleeves , collars , and socks ; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches .

the two tapered ends ( typically 5 inches ( 130 mm ) long ) are rigid and straight , allowing for easy knitting ; however , the two ends are connected by a flexible strand ( usually nylon ) that allows the two ends to be brought together .

circular needles are typically 24 - 60 inches long , and are usually used singly or in pairs ; again , the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle .

the cables / cords are screwed into the needles , allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles .

this also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed .

circular knitting needles in different lengths , materials and sizes , including plastic , aluminum , steel and nickel - plated brassthe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting , such as slip - stitch versions of double knitting .

circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting .

when cabling a knitted piece , a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn .

cable needles are typically very short ( a few inches ), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted .

at specific points indicated by the knitting pattern , the cable needle is moved , the stitches on it are worked by the other needles , then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist .

cable needles cable needles are a specific design , and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable .

largest circular knitting needles [ edit ] the largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size us 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall .

5 meter ( 11 ' 6 ") long knitting needles the current holder of the guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles is julia hopson [ 24 ] of penzance in cornwall .

julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6 .

ancillary tools [ edit ] some ancillary tools , also called notions , used by hand - knitters .

various tools have been developed to make hand - knitting easier .

crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding / casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge - to - edge .

other tools such as knitting spools or pom - pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments .

for large or complex knitting patterns , it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way ; therefore , several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch , including circular stitch markers , hanging markers , extra yarn and row counters .

a second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended ; this is prevented by " point protectors " that cap the tapered ends .

another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles ; for this , special stress - relieving gloves are available .

in traditional shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed .

finally , there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting , yarns and needles .

knitting styles / holds [ edit ] continental / german style [ edit ] main article : continental knitting continental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your left hand for both knitting and purling .

norwegian style [ edit ] main article : norwegian knitting while knit stitches are worked as in the classic continental style , the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle .

[ 25 ] russian style [ edit ] another variation on continental knitting , this style is achieved by " picking " up the yarn by moving the needle head into it .

in russian knitting , it is common to slip the first stitch of every row .

english style [ edit ] main article : english knitting english - style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in your right hand .

portuguese / greek / incan / turkish style [ edit ] this style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace - style hook , allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse ( purl ) side , e .

inside out " compared to western knitting techniques .

this is an ancient style of knitting , which spread from arabic culture to the iberian peninsula , during its occupation by muslims .

knitting techniques [ edit ] armenian [ edit ] the armenian knitting technique tacks the non - working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats .

double knitting [ edit ] main article : double knittinga technique used to create a flat , smooth , reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides , rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side .

mega knitting [ edit ] mega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter .

mega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting , except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles .

it was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless , automated knitting .

the hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted , meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle .

turn the left ( non - working ) hook to face away at all times ; turn the right ( working ) hook toward you up whilst knitting ( plain stitch ) and away whilst purling .

mega knitting produces a chunky , bulky fabric or an open lacy weave , depending on the weight and type of yarn used .

[ 26 ] micro knitting [ edit ] micro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles .

[ 27 ][ 28 ][ 29 ] she has published bugknits : extreme knitting for hobbyists , artists and knitters ( 2009 , blurb : isbn 978 - 1320025546 ).

annelies de kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0 .

[ 30 ][ 31 ] short row [ edit ] main article : short row ( knitting ) in short row knitting , the work is turned before a row is fully knitted .

wrap and turn [ edit ] just before the work is turned , the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch , forming a “ wrap .” later , this “ wrap ” is picked up and knitted into a stitch , concealing it from view .

the working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted , or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front , if it is to be purled , both of which maintain the proper (“ tipped back ”) orientation of the german double stitch .

twined knitting [ edit ] main article : twined knitting the technique , also known as two - end knitting , is a traditional scandinavian knitting technique .

it refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch .

this produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one - end knitting .

commercial applications [ edit ] industrially , metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres , catalytic converters for cars and many other uses .

these fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines .

many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections .

gordana gelhausen , who appeared in season six of the television show project runway , is primarily a knit designer .

other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include michael kors , fendi , and marc jacobs .

for individual hobbyists , websites such as etsy , big cartel and ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale , in a way similar to ebay .

graffiti [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the 2000s , a practice called knitting graffiti , guerilla knitting , or yarn bombing — the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings — emerged in the u .

[ 32 ] magda sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the us and knit the city are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the united kingdom .

for instance , dave cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large - scale public art installation in melbourne , australia for the big west arts festival in 2009 .

[ 34 ] a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti ".

the event is typically a multi - day event that caters to all knitters , crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community .

over the multi - day period , multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts , give away free exclusive patterns , provide classes , trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes .

traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn , knitting and crochet goodies .

some local crawls also provide a knit - along ( kal ) or crochet - along ( cal ) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see .

[ 36 ][ 37 ][ 38 ][ 39 ] charity [ edit ] drawing by marguerite martyn of two women and a child knitting for the war effort at a st .

louis , missouri , red cross office in 1917 hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups .

girls and women hand knitted socks , sweaters , scarves , mittens , gloves , and hats for soldiers in crimea , the american civil war , and the boer wars ; this practice continued in world war i , world war ii and the korean war , and continues for soldiers in iraq and afghanistan .

the australian charity wrap with love continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war .

in the historical projects , yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services ; often they were distributed by local chapters of the american red cross .

modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners ; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100 % worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors .

some charities teach women to knit as a means of clothing their families or supporting themselves .

prayer shawls , or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient , are donated to those experiencing loss or stress .

many knitters today hand knit and donate " chemo caps ", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy .

yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps .

penguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks .

[ 40 ] chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers .

[ 41 ] originally started after the 2004 indonesian tsunami , knitters without borders [ 42 ] is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality stephanie pearl - mcphee that encourages hand knitters to donate to médecins sans frontières ( doctors without borders ).

instead of hand knitting for charity , knitters are encouraged to donate a week ' s worth of disposable income , including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn .

knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors .

as of september 2011 , knitters without borders donors have contributed cad $ 1 , 062 , 217 .

this outreach is described as , " afghans for afghans is a humanitarian and educational people - to - people project that sends hand - knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters , vests , hats , mittens , and socks to the beleaguered people of afghanistan .

"[ 45 ] the knitters of the little yellow duck project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find , as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation .

[ 46 ] health benefits [ edit ] the earliest image of circular knitting , from the 15th century ad buxtehude altarpiece studies have shown that hand knitting , along with other forms of needlework , provide several significant health benefits .

these studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress , pain and depression , which in turn strengthens the body ' s immune system ,[ 47 ] as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure , heart rate , help prevent illness , and have a calming effect .

pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry , resulting in an increase in " feel good " hormones ( i .

[ 47 ] hand knitting , along with other leisure activities , has been linked to reducing the risk of developing alzheimer ' s [ 48 ] and dementia by preventing memory loss .

knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around with you , making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits .

[ 50 ] a repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at stitch links ,[ 51 ] an organization founded in bath , england .

knitting also helps in the area of social interaction ; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others .

one way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other .

[ 2 ] many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts .

knitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers .

knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit .

[ 2 ] notable knitters [ edit ] cat bordhi - pioneered teaching new and efficient knitting techniques kaffe fassett - american - born , british - based artist known for his colorful designs in the decorative arts stephanie pearl - mcphee - is a writer , knitter , and knit - wear designer magda sayeg - creator of knitta please knit graffiti movement barbara g .

walker - author of several encyclopedic knitting references stephen west - american knitter , fashion designer , educator , and author known for his knitting patterns and strong use of color elizabeth zimmermann - british - born hand knitting teacher and designer tom daley - british olympic gold medallist and knitting and crochet designer .

[ 52 ] elisabetta matsumoto - american physicist whose scientific interests include the study of knitted fabrics ' special mathematical and mechanical properties .

see also [ edit ] clothing portaltextile arts portal fiber art finger knitting knitted fabric knitting abbreviations knitting clubs the knitting guild association crochet macramé the tempestry project textile manufacturing yarn bombing sweater curse handicraft references [ edit ] ^ " techniques with theresa , frog pond edition ".

^ a b c a wale , according to knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide , is " a predominantly vertical column of needle loops generally produced by the same needles at successive ( not necessarily all ) knitting cycles .

a wale starts as soon as an empty needle starts to knit " ( spencer 1989 : 17 ).

warp knitted fabrics construction .

^ " knitting basics ".

alamac american knits llc .

warp - knitting technology ( 2nd ed .

shadow knitting .

slip - stitch knitting : color pattern the easy way .

alice starmore ' s book of fair isle knitting .

cables untangled : an exploration of cable knitting .

the complete book of traditional aran knitting .

knitting is coding ".

how to do the knit stitch ".

stitch ' n bitch : the knitter ' s handbook .

^ " knitting with glass – impossible !

^ " knitting glass ( fiberarts magazine summer issue 2011 )" ( pdf ).

^ " it ' s official : julia gains guinness world record for knitting with the largest knitting needles in the world ".

knitwitspenzance .

^ " the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them )".

allfreeknitting .

anthea crome : world ' s smallest knitwear ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

seventy stitches to the inch : althea crome ' s tiny knits ".

astounding knits !

: 101 spectacular knitted creations and daring feats .

knitters turn to graffiti artists with ' yarnbombing '".

the graffiti knitting epidemic ".

artists in pink fit as big knit vandal unravels artwork ".

a new movie , shot by a tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn , was partially inspired by " knitted graffiti "".

knitters without borders ".

knitting and crochet offer long - term health benefits ".

^ " knitting can keep alzheimer ' s at bay ".

the principles of knitting : methods and techniques of hand knitting .

knitting ".

a history of hand knitting .

knitting technology : a comprehensive handbook and practical guide .

mary thomas ' s knitting book .

knitting without tears .

knitknit : profiles and projects from knitting ' s new wave .

( 2008 ) knitty gritty - knitting for the absolute beginner .

( 1981 ) elizabeth zimmermann ' s knitter ' s almanac .

carol milne knitted glass - how does she do that ?

isbn 978 - 1482748048 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to knitting .

look up knitting in wiktionary , the free dictionary .

wikisource has the text of the 1905 new international encyclopedia article " knitting ".

com , relationship between yarn weight and knitting gauge .

university of illinois library guide to research in historic knitting " knitting ".

ravelry - a yarn - working social network ( from their about page : " ravelry is an inclusive , friendly website for knitters , crocheters , spinners , weavers , and dyers ". "

) vteknittingtools and materials knitting needle knitting needle cap needle gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting row counter stitch holder yarn styles bouclé eyelash lopi novelty variegated yarn brands coats group eisaku noro company kraemer yarns lion brand yarns patons and baldwins styles circular combined knitting continental knitting english knitting flat warp knitting stitches stockinette / stocking stitch garter decrease dip stitch elongated stitch increase plaited stitch yarn over techniques arm knitting basketweave bead knitting bias knitting binding / casting off bobble brioche knitting buttonhole cables casting on double knitting drop - stitch knitting entrelac faggoting finger knitting gather gauge grafting hemming illusion knitting lace medallion knitting picking up stitches pleat ribbing short row slip - stitch knitting spool knitting steek three needle bindoff thrumming tuck weaving welting patterns aran argyle fair isle intarsia machine knitting complete garment knitting fully fashioned knitting knitting machine knitting nancy stocking frame william lee ( inventor ) knitters anddesigners sam barsky nicky epstein kaffe fassett marianne kinzel herbert niebling shannon okey stephanie pearl - mcphee alice starmore debbie stoller meg swansen barbara g .

walker elizabeth zimmermann organizations i knit london knitta knitting clubs knitty ravelry revolutionary knitting circle stitch ' n bitch uk hand knitting association world wide knit in public day the knitting guild association related basic knitted fabrics blocking dye lot history knitted fabric knitting abbreviations list of knitting stitches selvage yarn bombing vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control national france bnf data germany israel united states japan czech republic other encyclopedia of modern ukraine retrieved from " https :// en .

title = knitting & oldid = 1149831060 " categories : knittinghandicraftscraftssheep woolwoolen clothingfibershidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from february 2020articles with permanently dead external linksarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidataarticles needing additional references from december 2021all articles needing additional referencesuse dmy dates from october 2017wikipedia articles needing clarification from march 2023articles with dead external links from january 2023articles containing potentially dated statements from may 2020all articles containing potentially dated statementspages using div col with small parametercommons category link from wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with emu identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

knitting with glass – impossible!?

– create the world you want skip to content create the world you want live the life you imagine about enermazing quotes specials free downloads menu about courseshaper world of magnifica quilting oneness enermazing quotes specials november 2011: nanowrimo – but not only free downloads how to get everything you want in life arts & crafts, creativity, featured, realise your dreams, true storiesknitting with glass – impossible!?

which is exactly what happened a few weeks ago when i came across artwork which i would not have believed possible: “knitted glass” by carol milne.

cakewalk 7" x 11" x 11" what intrigued me just as much as “how can this be possible?” was the context in which carol sees her knitted glass (see carol’s statement below).

i contacted her immediately to ask whether i might feature her work on my blog, and as you see she said yes 🙂 knit wit - self-portrait in knitted glass and knitted copper.

19" x 10" x 12" here’s carol’s brief statement about her work: i see my knitted work as metaphor for social structure.

darn - a fraying, knitted glove with a pun for a title.

the last one is e.d.’s favourite – i wonder why… 😉 bustle 7" x 16" x 16" quadrille 5" x 11" x 11" eddy 5" x 11" x 11" thank you, carol 🙂 an inspiring “real world” example for “knitting with glass” – or knitting society by making the “impossible” possible: blood-lines of action – butterfly effects for change by creatingreciprocity image sources: all photos courtesy carol milne www.carolmilne.com if you liked this post and can think of a friend or colleague who might be interested as well, please share or email it by clicking on the buttons below.

:) view all posts by maria post navigation previous postthe enermazing weekly ticker (8) 26th september – 2nd october 2011next post25 days ‘til halloween 2011 | halloween decorating ideas 14 thoughts on “knitting with glass – impossible!

create the world you want customize follow following sign up log in copy shortlink report this content view post in reader manage subscriptions collapse this bar loading comments... write a comment... email (required) name (required) website %d bloggers like this: knitting with glass – impossible !

– create the world you want skip to content create the world you want live the life you imagine about enermazing quotes specials free downloads menu about courseshaper world of magnifica quilting oneness enermazing quotes specials november 2011 : nanowrimo – but not only free downloads how to get everything you want in life arts & crafts , creativity , featured , realise your dreams , true storiesknitting with glass – impossible !

which is exactly what happened a few weeks ago when i came across artwork which i would not have believed possible : “ knitted glass ” by carol milne .

cakewalk 7 " x 11 " x 11 " what intrigued me just as much as “ how can this be possible ?” was the context in which carol sees her knitted glass ( see carol ’ s statement below ).

i contacted her immediately to ask whether i might feature her work on my blog , and as you see she said yes 🙂 knit wit - self - portrait in knitted glass and knitted copper .

19 " x 10 " x 12 " here ’ s carol ’ s brief statement about her work : i see my knitted work as metaphor for social structure .

darn - a fraying , knitted glove with a pun for a title .

d .’ s favourite – i wonder why … 😉 bustle 7 " x 16 " x 16 " quadrille 5 " x 11 " x 11 " eddy 5 " x 11 " x 11 " thank you , carol 🙂 an inspiring “ real world ” example for “ knitting with glass ” – or knitting society by making the “ impossible ” possible : blood - lines of action – butterfly effects for change by creatingreciprocity image sources : all photos courtesy carol milne www .

:) view all posts by maria post navigation previous postthe enermazing weekly ticker ( 8 ) 26th september – 2nd october 2011next post25 days ‘ til halloween 2011 | halloween decorating ideas 14 thoughts on “ knitting with glass – impossible !

i'd rather be knooking i'd rather be knooking knooking is knitting with a modified crochet hook.

this is not tunisian, slip stitch, crochetnit, double crochet or any other knit look alike.

you will be making actual knit and purl stitches.

co/inc to.... chain 8 pull up knit stitch on each side of the chain = 16 stitches 8 on each side of the chain 8. increase would look like this k,inc,k,k,k,k,k,k,inc,k on one side k,inc,k,k,k,k,k,k,inc,k on the other.

infant inc to 24 toddler inc to 32 child inc to 40 women inc to 48 men inc to 56 foot length.... knit until you have the length you need infant 3 1/2 inches toddler 5 inches child 6.5 inches women 8-11 inches men 10-12 inches short rows divide stiches 1/2 on a stitch holder.

slip stitch (ss) 1st stitch knit to last, but dont knit last put on holder, turn 2.)

ss 1st stitch, knit to 2nd to last, knit last stitch and 1 held stitch together, pull up 1 increase, turn.

knit around cuff knit 1, purl 1 (ribbing) or ribbing of choice for as long as you want your cuff.

(transition into knooking (knitting)).

slipstitch into back loop of 3rd chain (counts as first knit stitch on next row.)

knooked (knit):pull up one knit stitch from back loop of each crochet stitch all the way around = 48 stitches.knook (knit) in spiral (round) until you have 6 rnds.crochet (twisted dc’s):skip 1st knit stitch, ch3 in 2nd knit stitch (counts as a dc) then dc in 1st knit stitch (do not bind off stitches keep them live for entire rnd.)

*skip next knit stitch, dc in next, then dc in skipped stitch* .

*knook (knit): 6 rnds., crochet twisted dc’s 1 rnd*.

end with 6 rnds of knooking (knitting).

crochet:rnd 1: chain 3 in first knit stitch (counts as 1st dc), dc around, (ok to bind these dc’s off) slipstitch into top of 3rd chain.

drawstring:where you joined bottom of bag and where 1st knit stitch happened is where you will attach crochet chain to hide joining.

happy knooking posted by ronda at 11:05 am 9 comments: email thisblogthis!share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest sunday, september 4, 2011 another knook hook so i made my own knook hook that has a pointy end like a knitting needle.

posted by ronda at 8:33 pm 11 comments: email thisblogthis!share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest older posts home subscribe to: posts (atom) blog archive ▼ 2012 (3) ▼ august (1) sock formula ► april (1) ► march (1) ► 2011 (11) ► september (1) ► august (1) ► july (1) ► april (2) ► march (1) ► january (5) ► 2010 (12) ► december (12) search this blog popular posts knitting with knooking knit have your working yarn to the back.

to knit just insert your hook into loop, yo and draw yarn through loop.

do nothing else leave th... knooked hat crown down free pattern knooked hat by: ronda chapman offthehookart starting at the crown and knitting in the round materials: size g knook 4 ply worst yarn ne... hugs and kisses hybrid bag so while on break i thought would design a simple drawstring bag that has both knooking and crochet incorporated in it.

!ronda about me unknown view my complete profile pages home everything, but knooking my favorite places japanese books click on under book to take a look "ipponbari" japanese knitting with a crochet hook my etsy store - offthehookart denise interchangeable hooks for knooking knooking jen's place picture window theme.

i ' d rather be knooking i ' d rather be knooking knooking is knitting with a modified crochet hook .

this is not tunisian , slip stitch , crochetnit , double crochet or any other knit look alike .

you will be making actual knit and purl stitches .

co / inc to .... chain 8 pull up knit stitch on each side of the chain = 16 stitches 8 on each side of the chain 8 .

infant inc to 24 toddler inc to 32 child inc to 40 women inc to 48 men inc to 56 foot length .... knit until you have the length you need infant 3 1 / 2 inches toddler 5 inches child 6 .

slip stitch ( ss ) 1st stitch knit to last , but dont knit last put on holder , turn 2 .)

ss 1st stitch , knit to 2nd to last , knit last stitch and 1 held stitch together , pull up 1 increase , turn .

knit around cuff knit 1 , purl 1 ( ribbing ) or ribbing of choice for as long as you want your cuff .

( transition into knooking ( knitting )).

slipstitch into back loop of 3rd chain ( counts as first knit stitch on next row .)

knooked ( knit ): pull up one knit stitch from back loop of each crochet stitch all the way around = 48 stitches .

knook ( knit ) in spiral ( round ) until you have 6 rnds .

crochet ( twisted dc ’ s ): skip 1st knit stitch , ch3 in 2nd knit stitch ( counts as a dc ) then dc in 1st knit stitch ( do not bind off stitches keep them live for entire rnd .)

* skip next knit stitch , dc in next , then dc in skipped stitch * .

* knook ( knit ): 6 rnds ., crochet twisted dc ’ s 1 rnd *.

end with 6 rnds of knooking ( knitting ).

crochet : rnd 1 : chain 3 in first knit stitch ( counts as 1st dc ), dc around , ( ok to bind these dc ’ s off ) slipstitch into top of 3rd chain .

drawstring : where you joined bottom of bag and where 1st knit stitch happened is where you will attach crochet chain to hide joining .

share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest sunday , september 4 , 2011 another knook hook so i made my own knook hook that has a pointy end like a knitting needle .

share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest older posts home subscribe to : posts ( atom ) blog archive ▼ 2012 ( 3 ) ▼ august ( 1 ) sock formula ► april ( 1 ) ► march ( 1 ) ► 2011 ( 11 ) ► september ( 1 ) ► august ( 1 ) ► july ( 1 ) ► april ( 2 ) ► march ( 1 ) ► january ( 5 ) ► 2010 ( 12 ) ► december ( 12 ) search this blog popular posts knitting with knooking knit have your working yarn to the back .

to knit just insert your hook into loop , yo and draw yarn through loop .

do nothing else leave th ... knooked hat crown down free pattern knooked hat by : ronda chapman offthehookart starting at the crown and knitting in the round materials : size g knook 4 ply worst yarn ne ... hugs and kisses hybrid bag so while on break i thought would design a simple drawstring bag that has both knooking and crochet incorporated in it .

ronda about me unknown view my complete profile pages home everything , but knooking my favorite places japanese books click on under book to take a look " ipponbari " japanese knitting with a crochet hook my etsy store - offthehookart denise interchangeable hooks for knooking knooking jen ' s place picture window theme .

the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them) | allfreeknitting.com close advanced pattern search search term enter a search term (optional) categories select one (optional) all learn to knit accessories baby knits bags children's knits cowls felted knits fingerless gloves knitting patterns free afghan knitting patterns gifts hats home decor knitting charities knitting companies knitting designers loom patterns men's knits miscellaneous mittens motifs patterns for the holidays pet knits reviews scarves shawls socks sweaters tops toys vests printable (optional) show only printer-friendly patterns difficulty level select one (optional) all beginner intermediate advanced easy kid friendly yarn weight select one (optional) all (6) super bulky/super chunky (4-11 stitches for 4 inches) (5) bulky/chunky (12-15 stitches for 4 inches) (4) medium weight/worsted weight and aran (16-20 stitches to 4 inches) (3) light/dk (21-24 stitches to 4 inches) (2) fine (23-26 stitches to 4 inches) (1) super fine (27-32 stitches to 4 inches) (0) lace (33-40 stitches to 4 inches).

other (7) jumbo knitting needle size select as many as you like (optional) 1 or 2.25 mm 2 or 2.75 mm 3 or 3.25 mm 4 or 3.5 mm 5 or 3.75 mm 6 or 4 mm 7 or 4.5 mm 8 or 5 mm 9 or 5.5 mm 10 or 6 mm 10.5 or 6.5 mm 11 or 8 mm 13 or 9 mm 15 or 10 mm 17 or 12.75 mm 19 or 15 mm 35 or 19 mm 50 or 25 mm circular knitting needles double-pointed knitting needles (dpns) advanced pattern search register now my knitting patterns subscribe sign in menu subscribefree ebooksgiveawayshow toscollectionssubmit your projectproject of the daywrite for us popular free knitting patterns knitting for beginnersknit cowl patternseasy knitting patternsknitting for babies categories learn to knit tips and tricks video tutorials accessories boot cuffs headbands knit belts knit jewelry baby knits baby blankets baby sets baby sweater knitting patterns booties free baby hat knitting patterns bags tote children's knits children's knit gloves and mittens children's knit scarves children's knitted sweater patterns knit children's hats cowls neck warmers felted knits felted bags fingerless gloves knitting patterns gloves wrist warmers free afghan knitting patterns cable afghans knit throws gifts hats cable hats earflap hats knit berets ribbed hats home decor baskets bath knits dishcloths and washcloths kitchen and dining pillows potholders rugs knitting charities knitting companies knitting designers loom patterns loom hats loom scarves loom socks loom wraps men's knits gloves and mittens hats scarves sweaters and vests miscellaneous collections mittens motifs patterns for the holidays 4th of july knits christmas knits easter knits halloween knits st. patrick's day knits thanksgiving knits valentine's day knits pet knits dog sweaters reviews book reviews product reviews scarves infinity scarves shawls knit ponchos socks cable socks knit leg warmers slippers sweaters cardigans shrugs and boleros tops tanks toys amigurumi vests latest comments lisa "actually it could easily be modified and done in one piece.

hope this helps, happy knitting."

hope this helps, happy knitting."

see all comments reply home > learn to knit > the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them) the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them) sometimes referred to as knitting holds, these five knitting styles are distinct from knitting methods.

some of them might even help you knit faster!

by: toby kuhnke, editor, allfreeknitting.com updated december 28, 2022 you must be logged in to add a private note.

save remove more share this link we are adding the pattern to your knitting patterns.

this pattern has been saved to my knitting patterns.

click here to view your knitting patterns.

login | register everyone's knitting style is a little different.

whether it's tension, your personal knitting gauge, or the way you wrap your yarn around your fingers.

but when it comes to which hand you hold your yarn in, the knitting world is pretty divided.

there are five basic knitting styles based on the way the yarn is held and wrapped around the working needle.

the names of these styles often are associated with nationalities, like english knitting or irish cottage style, but the style you prefer has very little to do with where you grew up, or even where you learned to knit.

there are people in england and the united states who do not knit english (also called american) style, and there are plenty of people in continental europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non-dominant hand, as is done in continental knitting.

likewise, portuguese knitting is done all over the world, but the name "portuguese" is just the name that stuck.

because of this, you will see that almost every single one of these knitting styles has two or more alternate names.

english knitting (throwing) other names: american, french (in japan) what is english knitting?

english knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand, alongside the working needle.

while it is common in the british isles and north america, english knitting is practiced by knitters all over the world and is probably the most common.

in a survey of just under 300 allfreeknitting readers, more than 60% said they knit english style.

continental knitting (picking) other names: german, european what is continental knitting?

continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non-dominant hand.

many knitters find this method a lot quicker, and crocheters who are learning how to knit often find continental feels more natural in their hands.

roughly 30% of the knitters from the survey mentioned above knit continental.

because this style holds the yarn in the non-dominant hand, there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling.

variations on continental style norwegian knitting the norwegian style of knitting is distinct because of the way purl stitches are worked.

the norwegian purl is worked with the yarn in back; patterns that switch back and forth between knitting and purling, like rib stitches, are great for practicing the norwegian purl.

this particular hold puts the working yarn in the non-dominant hand, which makes it a variant of continental; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style.

this video for how to knit the norwegian purl is a great way to learn this fun and useful technique.

russian knitting russian knitting is very similar to regular continental, and the knit and purl stitches themselves are worked in the same way.

the only distinction with russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non-dominant hand, very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg.

this style is similar to lever knitting (see below) with the yarn in the non-dominant hand.

lever knitting (flicking) other names: peruvian, catholic, australian, irish cottage what is lever knitting?

lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely, creating a sort of back-and-forth levering motion.

many knitters who use this style hold their working needle like a pencil, which frees up their pointer finger to hold the tension of their yarn and "flick" it around the end of the needle.

stephanie pearl-mcphee, also known as the yarn harlot, famously uses this technique to knitting at lightning fast speeds.

portuguese knitting other names: despite the fact that portuguese knitting is done around the world and is less tied to a specific location than any other style of knitting, portuguese knitting does not have any other common names.

what is portuguese knitting?

portuguese knitting is an especially unique knitting hold because the tension of the yarn is not held in the hands at all.

instead, portuguese knitters wrap the yarn around the back of their necks.

the reason so many knitters like this style is that it frees up the fingers for speed.

in every other knitting style, the tension is held in the hands; this gives your hands two jobs to do at the same time -- holding the yarn and working the stitches with the needles.

this technique is also great for helping with knitting pain because so much of the stress in the hands comes from holding the yarn.

if knitting with the yarn around your neck is a little too out of the box for you, you can also get a portuguese knitting pin that attaches to your shirt and holds the tension there.

shetland knitting other names: pit knitting, scottish, shetland, from the hip, old way what is shetland knitting if you're picturing a woman standing in the scottish highlands with a knitting needle attached to a belt around her waist and knitting, you're probably not far off.

the shetland style of knitting goes by many names, but it's recognizable because of the way the working needle is held against the body.

because the dominant hand doesn't have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time, this style of knitting is much faster.

shetland knitting is also one of the new forms of knitting that can easily be done standing up.

it was designed as a way for knitters to quickly work up garments while also working on other chores.

this style is very similar to the style used by hazel tindall, who is often considered the world's fastest knitter.

knitting methods: eastern, western, and combination knitting it should be noted that there's a difference between knitting styles and knitting methods.

knitting style is a synonym for a knitting hold -- the way you hold your needles and yarn.

knitting method, on the other hand, has to do with the way you form the stitches themselves.

there are only three possible knitting methods -- eastern, western, and combination.

most knitters knit in the western method, although eastern is also very common.

combination knitting utilizes the benefits of both styles in one piece of fabric to make complicated stitches much easier to knit.

combination knitting is popular because you can easily switch between knitting and purling without moving the yarn from one side of the needles to the other.

here's a chart of the main differences between eastern, western, and combination knitting methods.

western eastern combination knit stitches leading leg in front leading leg in back leading leg in front purl stitches leading leg in front leading leg in back leading leg in back yarn wrap counter-clockwise(for right-handed) clockwise(for right-handed) counter-clockwise for knit (right-handed)clockwise for purl (right-handed) stitches worked through front loop worked through back loop worked through back loop for knitsworked through front loop for purls twisted stitches worked through back loop worked through front loop worked through front loop for knitsworked through back loop for purls check out this great article that goes deeper into the english vs continental debate!

note: this project is from i like knitting digital magazine.

subscribe to the i like knitting gold club for unlimited access to their entire pattern archive, featuring hundreds of exclusive patterns.

which knitting style do you prefer?

read nexthow to knit a hat free projects, giveaways, exclusive partner offers, and more straight to your inbox!

tags / related topics how to your recently viewed projects the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them) images from other crafters be the first to upload your own image for this pattern!

reply 0 report abuse streen 9692047 mar 18, 2019 i never knew that there were so many knitting styles.

project of the day gymir cowl "this simply huge cowl has been named after the giant gymir, who was in norse mythology the giant whose daughter, gerr, ultimately… see more continue reading: "gymir cowl" what's hot how to knit a hat how to knit intarsia how many stitches to cast on for a hat how much yarn do i need?

the 5 knitting styles (and how to knit them) how many stitches to cast on for a blanket condo knitting how many stitches should i cast on for a scarf?

6 stretchy cast on methods 13 circular knitting patterns for practice my knitting patterns (0) view » something worth saving?

register now for free to: save all your favorite patternsadd personal notesquickly reference your patterns log in join us todayforgot password connect with us our newest patterns & articles mangrove knit stitch woven-look throw knitting pattern loose ends easy to knit slipper pattern knit flat with bulky yarn on straight needles waffle stitch pattern stylish cardigan with colorful stripes unisex winter hat spider fingerless gloves waffle stitch kitchen towel see more see more of our newest patterns & articles free ebooks 15 free cute knitting patterns for every season 24 quick and easy knitting patterns 9 free knitting patterns perfect for spring a knitters gift guide: 8 homemade gift ideas a yarn hoarders guide to organization: knitting storage solutions, simple knitting patterns and more easy lace knitting patterns how to knit for beginners: 9 free tutorials the best light & lacy knit scarf patterns: 7 free scarf patterns for you see more see more free ebooks about us advertise contact us faq keyword index do not sell my personal information privacy policy share your project subscribe terms of service unsubscribe prime publishing craft group © copyright 2023 prime publishing, llc.

close the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them ) | allfreeknitting .

com close advanced pattern search search term enter a search term ( optional ) categories select one ( optional ) all learn to knit accessories baby knits bags children ' s knits cowls felted knits fingerless gloves knitting patterns free afghan knitting patterns gifts hats home decor knitting charities knitting companies knitting designers loom patterns men ' s knits miscellaneous mittens motifs patterns for the holidays pet knits reviews scarves shawls socks sweaters tops toys vests printable ( optional ) show only printer - friendly patterns difficulty level select one ( optional ) all beginner intermediate advanced easy kid friendly yarn weight select one ( optional ) all ( 6 ) super bulky / super chunky ( 4 - 11 stitches for 4 inches ) ( 5 ) bulky / chunky ( 12 - 15 stitches for 4 inches ) ( 4 ) medium weight / worsted weight and aran ( 16 - 20 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 3 ) light / dk ( 21 - 24 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 2 ) fine ( 23 - 26 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 1 ) super fine ( 27 - 32 stitches to 4 inches ) ( 0 ) lace ( 33 - 40 stitches to 4 inches ).

other ( 7 ) jumbo knitting needle size select as many as you like ( optional ) 1 or 2 .

75 mm 19 or 15 mm 35 or 19 mm 50 or 25 mm circular knitting needles double - pointed knitting needles ( dpns ) advanced pattern search register now my knitting patterns subscribe sign in menu subscribefree ebooksgiveawayshow toscollectionssubmit your projectproject of the daywrite for us popular free knitting patterns knitting for beginnersknit cowl patternseasy knitting patternsknitting for babies categories learn to knit tips and tricks video tutorials accessories boot cuffs headbands knit belts knit jewelry baby knits baby blankets baby sets baby sweater knitting patterns booties free baby hat knitting patterns bags tote children ' s knits children ' s knit gloves and mittens children ' s knit scarves children ' s knitted sweater patterns knit children ' s hats cowls neck warmers felted knits felted bags fingerless gloves knitting patterns gloves wrist warmers free afghan knitting patterns cable afghans knit throws gifts hats cable hats earflap hats knit berets ribbed hats home decor baskets bath knits dishcloths and washcloths kitchen and dining pillows potholders rugs knitting charities knitting companies knitting designers loom patterns loom hats loom scarves loom socks loom wraps men ' s knits gloves and mittens hats scarves sweaters and vests miscellaneous collections mittens motifs patterns for the holidays 4th of july knits christmas knits easter knits halloween knits st .

patrick ' s day knits thanksgiving knits valentine ' s day knits pet knits dog sweaters reviews book reviews product reviews scarves infinity scarves shawls knit ponchos socks cable socks knit leg warmers slippers sweaters cardigans shrugs and boleros tops tanks toys amigurumi vests latest comments lisa " actually it could easily be modified and done in one piece .

hope this helps , happy knitting ."

hope this helps , happy knitting ."

see all comments reply home > learn to knit > the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them ) the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them ) sometimes referred to as knitting holds , these five knitting styles are distinct from knitting methods .

some of them might even help you knit faster !

by : toby kuhnke , editor , allfreeknitting .

save remove more share this link we are adding the pattern to your knitting patterns .

this pattern has been saved to my knitting patterns .

click here to view your knitting patterns .

login | register everyone ' s knitting style is a little different .

whether it ' s tension , your personal knitting gauge , or the way you wrap your yarn around your fingers .

but when it comes to which hand you hold your yarn in , the knitting world is pretty divided .

there are five basic knitting styles based on the way the yarn is held and wrapped around the working needle .

the names of these styles often are associated with nationalities , like english knitting or irish cottage style , but the style you prefer has very little to do with where you grew up , or even where you learned to knit .

there are people in england and the united states who do not knit english ( also called american ) style , and there are plenty of people in continental europe who would scoff at the idea of holding their yarn in their non - dominant hand , as is done in continental knitting .

likewise , portuguese knitting is done all over the world , but the name " portuguese " is just the name that stuck .

because of this , you will see that almost every single one of these knitting styles has two or more alternate names .

english knitting ( throwing ) other names : american , french ( in japan ) what is english knitting ?

english knitting is a knitting style that involves holding the yarn in the dominant hand , alongside the working needle .

while it is common in the british isles and north america , english knitting is practiced by knitters all over the world and is probably the most common .

in a survey of just under 300 allfreeknitting readers , more than 60 % said they knit english style .

continental knitting ( picking ) other names : german , european what is continental knitting ?

continental knitting is a knitting style in which the knitter holds the yarn with the non - dominant hand .

many knitters find this method a lot quicker , and crocheters who are learning how to knit often find continental feels more natural in their hands .

roughly 30 % of the knitters from the survey mentioned above knit continental .

because this style holds the yarn in the non - dominant hand , there is no need to move the yarn in front or behind the needles in order to switch between knitting and purling .

variations on continental style norwegian knitting the norwegian style of knitting is distinct because of the way purl stitches are worked .

the norwegian purl is worked with the yarn in back ; patterns that switch back and forth between knitting and purling , like rib stitches , are great for practicing the norwegian purl .

this particular hold puts the working yarn in the non - dominant hand , which makes it a variant of continental ; the knit stitches are worked just like the regular continental style .

this video for how to knit the norwegian purl is a great way to learn this fun and useful technique .

russian knitting russian knitting is very similar to regular continental , and the knit and purl stitches themselves are worked in the same way .

the only distinction with russian knitting is that the working yarn is wrapped around the pointer finger of the non - dominant hand , very close to where it comes out from the fabric as the leading leg .

this style is similar to lever knitting ( see below ) with the yarn in the non - dominant hand .

lever knitting ( flicking ) other names : peruvian , catholic , australian , irish cottage what is lever knitting ?

lever knitting a knitting style in which the knitter holds the working yarn in the dominant hand and loops the yarn around the working needle without removing the dominant hand from the needle completely , creating a sort of back - and - forth levering motion .

many knitters who use this style hold their working needle like a pencil , which frees up their pointer finger to hold the tension of their yarn and " flick " it around the end of the needle .

stephanie pearl - mcphee , also known as the yarn harlot , famously uses this technique to knitting at lightning fast speeds .

portuguese knitting other names : despite the fact that portuguese knitting is done around the world and is less tied to a specific location than any other style of knitting , portuguese knitting does not have any other common names .

what is portuguese knitting ?

portuguese knitting is an especially unique knitting hold because the tension of the yarn is not held in the hands at all .

instead , portuguese knitters wrap the yarn around the back of their necks .

the reason so many knitters like this style is that it frees up the fingers for speed .

in every other knitting style , the tension is held in the hands ; this gives your hands two jobs to do at the same time -- holding the yarn and working the stitches with the needles .

this technique is also great for helping with knitting pain because so much of the stress in the hands comes from holding the yarn .

if knitting with the yarn around your neck is a little too out of the box for you , you can also get a portuguese knitting pin that attaches to your shirt and holds the tension there .

shetland knitting other names : pit knitting , scottish , shetland , from the hip , old way what is shetland knitting if you ' re picturing a woman standing in the scottish highlands with a knitting needle attached to a belt around her waist and knitting , you ' re probably not far off .

the shetland style of knitting goes by many names , but it ' s recognizable because of the way the working needle is held against the body .

because the dominant hand doesn ' t have to worry about holding the tension of the yarn and the working needle at the same time , this style of knitting is much faster .

shetland knitting is also one of the new forms of knitting that can easily be done standing up .

it was designed as a way for knitters to quickly work up garments while also working on other chores .

this style is very similar to the style used by hazel tindall , who is often considered the world ' s fastest knitter .

knitting methods : eastern , western , and combination knitting it should be noted that there ' s a difference between knitting styles and knitting methods .

knitting style is a synonym for a knitting hold -- the way you hold your needles and yarn .

knitting method , on the other hand , has to do with the way you form the stitches themselves .

there are only three possible knitting methods -- eastern , western , and combination .

most knitters knit in the western method , although eastern is also very common .

combination knitting utilizes the benefits of both styles in one piece of fabric to make complicated stitches much easier to knit .

combination knitting is popular because you can easily switch between knitting and purling without moving the yarn from one side of the needles to the other .

here ' s a chart of the main differences between eastern , western , and combination knitting methods .

western eastern combination knit stitches leading leg in front leading leg in back leading leg in front purl stitches leading leg in front leading leg in back leading leg in back yarn wrap counter - clockwise ( for right - handed ) clockwise ( for right - handed ) counter - clockwise for knit ( right - handed ) clockwise for purl ( right - handed ) stitches worked through front loop worked through back loop worked through back loop for knitsworked through front loop for purls twisted stitches worked through back loop worked through front loop worked through front loop for knitsworked through back loop for purls check out this great article that goes deeper into the english vs continental debate !

note : this project is from i like knitting digital magazine .

subscribe to the i like knitting gold club for unlimited access to their entire pattern archive , featuring hundreds of exclusive patterns .

which knitting style do you prefer ?

read nexthow to knit a hat free projects , giveaways , exclusive partner offers , and more straight to your inbox !

tags / related topics how to your recently viewed projects the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them ) images from other crafters be the first to upload your own image for this pattern !

reply 0 report abuse streen 9692047 mar 18 , 2019 i never knew that there were so many knitting styles .

project of the day gymir cowl " this simply huge cowl has been named after the giant gymir , who was in norse mythology the giant whose daughter , gerr , ultimately … see more continue reading : " gymir cowl " what ' s hot how to knit a hat how to knit intarsia how many stitches to cast on for a hat how much yarn do i need ?

the 5 knitting styles ( and how to knit them ) how many stitches to cast on for a blanket condo knitting how many stitches should i cast on for a scarf ?

6 stretchy cast on methods 13 circular knitting patterns for practice my knitting patterns ( 0 ) view » something worth saving ?

register now for free to : save all your favorite patternsadd personal notesquickly reference your patterns log in join us todayforgot password connect with us our newest patterns & articles mangrove knit stitch woven - look throw knitting pattern loose ends easy to knit slipper pattern knit flat with bulky yarn on straight needles waffle stitch pattern stylish cardigan with colorful stripes unisex winter hat spider fingerless gloves waffle stitch kitchen towel see more see more of our newest patterns & articles free ebooks 15 free cute knitting patterns for every season 24 quick and easy knitting patterns 9 free knitting patterns perfect for spring a knitters gift guide : 8 homemade gift ideas a yarn hoarders guide to organization : knitting storage solutions , simple knitting patterns and more easy lace knitting patterns how to knit for beginners : 9 free tutorials the best light & lacy knit scarf patterns : 7 free scarf patterns for you see more see more free ebooks about us advertise contact us faq keyword index do not sell my personal information privacy policy share your project subscribe terms of service unsubscribe prime publishing craft group © copyright 2023 prime publishing , llc .

