crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1crochet hook 5.2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12.1yarn bombing 12.2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাcatalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमराठीမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification.

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "crochet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (march 2023) (learn how and when to remove this template message)for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae, see crochet (insect anatomy).

for the baseball pitcher, see garrett crochet.

crochet (english: /kroʊˈʃeɪ/;[1] french: [kʁɔʃɛ][2]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn, thread, or strands of other materials.

[3] the name is derived from the french term crochet, meaning 'hook'.

the key difference between crochet and knitting, beyond the implements used for their production, is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun, while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time.

some variant forms of crochet, such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace, do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time.

demonstration of crochet technique etymology[edit] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet, a diminutive of croche, in turn from the germanic croc, both meaning "hook".

[3] it was used in 17th-century french lace-making, where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace.

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile, and the hooked needle used to produce it.

[4] in 1567, the tailor of mary, queen of scots, jehan de compiegne, supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet, "soye à coudre et crochetz".

[5] origins[edit] 19th century crochet from orvieto, italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce, but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century.

[6] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding, a different looped yarn technique.

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823. this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse, of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread.

[7] the first is "simple open crochet" (crochet simple ajour), a mesh of chain-stitch arches.

the second (illustrated here) starts in a semi-open form (demi jour), where chain-stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip-stitch crochet, and closes with a star made with "double-crochet stitches" (dubbelde hekelsteek: double-crochet in british terminology; single-crochet in us).

[8] the third purse is made entirely in double-crochet.

[9] nonetheless, the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd's hook, and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn.

[10] in 1844, one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states: crochet needles, sometimes called shepherds' hooks, are made of steel, ivory, or box-wood.

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes...[11] two years later, the same author writes: crochet, — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland, with a small hooked needle called a shepherd's hook, — has, within the last seven years, aided by taste and fashion, obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature.

it derives its present name from the french; the instrument with which it is worked being by them, from its crooked shape, termed 'crochet.'

[12] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip-stitch crochet, with u.s. american terminology always using the latter (reserving single crochet for use as noted above).

[13] it similarly equates "double" and "french crochet".

[14] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin, there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet.

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present-day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique.

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms.

[16] shepherd's hook, 19th-century tapered hook, modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd's hook eases the production of slip-stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time.

[citation needed] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd's- and single crochet, and the similar equivalence of french- and double crochet, there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd's knitting, leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively; a distinction that is still made.

shepherd's hooks are still being made for local slip-stitch crochet traditions.

[citation needed] irish crochet[edit] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth, about 1970 irish crochet lace, late 19th century.

in the 19th century, as ireland was facing the great irish famine (1845–1849), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief[17] (the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers).

[18] men, women, children joined a co-operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine.

schools to teach crocheting were started.

when the irish immigrated to the americas, they were able to take with them crocheting.

[19] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet, publishing the first book of patterns in 1846. irish lace became popular in europe and america, and was made in quantity until the first world war.

[20] modern practice and culture[edit] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s.

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era, peaking between 1910 and 1920, became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching.

[citation needed] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center, 1943. photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared, though, and new publications called for white or pale threads, except for fancy purses, which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded.

after world war i, far fewer crochet patterns were published, and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th-century patterns.

[citation needed] after world war ii, from the late 1940s until the early 1960s, there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts, particularly in the united states, with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies, potholders, and other home items, along with updates of earlier publications.

the craft remained primarily a homemaker's art until the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares, a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors.

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid-20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity, the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy, as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn.

as well as books and classes, there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet.

[21] filet crochet, tunisian crochet, tapestry crochet, broomstick lace, hairpin lace, cro-hooking, and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method.

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala.

crochet table decor, kolkata, west bengal, india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well.

christopher kane's fall 2011 ready-to-wear collection[22] makes intensive use of the granny square, one of the most basic of crochet motifs.

in addition, crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway.

materials[edit] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted, most commonly yarn or thread.

yarn, one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting, has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns.

acrylic can also be used when crocheting, as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool.

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts, which can be used to make tassels, fringe, and many other items; a pom-pom circle, used to make pom-poms; a tape measure and a gauge measure, both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches; a row counter; and occasionally plastic rings, which are used for special projects.

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to "go green" and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags, old t-shirts or sheets, vcr or cassette tape, and ribbon.

[citation needed] crochet hook[edit] aluminium crochet hooks main article: crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials, such as bone, bamboo, aluminium, plastic, and steel.

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0.4 to 3.5 millimeters, or from 00 to 16 in american sizing.

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace.

aluminium, bamboo, and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2.5 to 19 millimeters in size, or from b to s in american sizing.

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle, while double-ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle.

while this is not in itself a hook, it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches.

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn[edit] main article: yarn a hank of wool yarn (center) is uncoiled into its basic loop.

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting.

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls, or skeins (hanks), although it may also be wound on spools or cones.

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

thicker yarns generally require large-diameter crochet hooks, whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks.

before use, hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center, making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for crochet, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting; however, wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it.

[citation needed] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is, or braided or plied with another.

[citation needed] process[edit] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace-weight mohair yarn.

crochet tablecloth, kolkata, west bengal, india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip-knot loop on the hook (though other methods, such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used), pulling another loop through the first loop, and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length.

tunisian crochet, however, draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time.

like knitting, crochet can be worked either flat (back and forth in rows) or in the round (in spirals, such as when making tubular pieces).

[citation needed] types of stitches[edit] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970. there are six main types of basic stitches (the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe).

single crochet stitch (called double crochet stitch in the uk) – easiest stitch to master half-double crochet stitch (called half treble stitch in the uk) – the 'in-between' stitch, sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch (called treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over once) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble (or triple) crochet stitch (called double treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over twice) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same, they differ in height and thickness.

international crochet terms and notations[edit] main article: list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols, abbreviations, and us/uk terms in the english-speaking crochet world, basic stitches have different names that vary by country.

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations.

in the united states, crochet terminology and sizing guidelines, as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling, are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council.

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and, if unmeasured, these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches.

in order to control for this inconsistency, printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric.

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook.

north americans call this gauge, referring to the result of these adjustments; british crocheters speak of tension, which refers to the crafter's grip on the yarn while producing stitches.

[citation needed] differences from and similarities to knitting[edit] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles.

in most crochet, the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook (with the exception being tunisian crochet), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously.

dropped stitches, which can unravel a knitted fabric, rarely interfere with crochet work, due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet.

in knitting, each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below, whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it.

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks, the stitches above and below remain intact, and because of the complex looping of each stitch, the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed.

[citation needed] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook, but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double-ended needles.

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined, either by sewing or crocheting, whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric, such as entrelac.

[citation needed] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece.

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires.

knitting can be accomplished by machine, while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand.

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different: a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools, and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch.

[27] while most crochet is made with a hook, there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom.

[28] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting.

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off.

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits, purls, and cables, and get a similar result.

[29] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting, tends to have less "give" than knitted fabric, and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items.

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch, both made with the same size yarn and needle/hook, it is not necessarily true for crochet in general.

most crochet uses far less than 1/3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces, and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn.

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces.

according to sources[30] claiming to have tested the 1/3 more yarn assertion, a single crochet stitch (sc) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch, but more yarn than stockinette stitch.

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric.

[citation needed] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric, more like knit garter stitch.

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted, provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used, but the cord's properties should be taken into account.

for example, lofty, thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted, which does not crush their airy structure, while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet.

[31] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time.

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools, as shown here.

unlike crochet, knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds.

charity and activism[edit] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war.

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals, for sick patients and also for newborn babies.

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose, such as crocheting for homeless shelters, nursing homes, etc.

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats (commonly referred to as "chemo caps") and donate them to cancer treatment centers, for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair.

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love, crochet for cancer,[32] and soldiers' angels.

in 2020, people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches, koala mittens and wildlife nests.

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20,000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project.

[35] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet[edit] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two-dimensionally.

[36] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong, durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create.

[36] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes, in imitation of a coral reef.

[37] as hyperbolic and mathematics-based crochet has become more popular, there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists.

two shows were sant ocean hall at the smithsonian in washington d.c. and sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania.

in the same section, semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more.

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture.

the following publications, explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture.

emergent explorations: analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design: the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the past few years, a practice called yarn bombing, or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings, emerged in the us and spread worldwide.

[41] styles in crochet[edit] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner (c2c) crochet see also[edit] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references[edit] ^ "crochet".

^ "crochet".

^ a b "crochet".

^ lis paludan, crochet: history & technique, interweave press, loveland co, isbn 1883010098, p. 76 ^ [1] a. b. van meerten, penélopé, of, maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd, amsterdam, 1824, pp.

90–94 ^ sarah hazell, 200 crochet stitches, search press, kent, 2013, isbn 978-1-84448-963-3 ^ [2] elizabeth grant, the memoirs of a highland lady, john murray, london, 1898 p. 182.

152 ^ [4] miss lambert, hand-book of needlework, new york city, 1842, p.92 ^ [5] miss lambert, my crochet sampler, london, 1844, pp.

9–10 ^ nancy nehring, learn slip stitch crochet, annie's attic, berne in, 2008, isbn 1596352159, p. 2 ^ [6] mlle.

riego de la branchardiere, knitting, crochet, and netting, london, 1846, p.57 ^ [7] mrs. gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crotchet work, edinburgh, 1840 ^ [8] jane gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crochet work, 4th ed., 1847 ^ "crochet | craft".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010-06-01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles.

^ "crochet history - crochet guild of america (cgoa)".

www.crochet.org.

"bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star".

^ "right type and size of a crochet hook".

^ "crochet abbreviations master list".

^ "standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting".

knit or crochet - have it your way.

^ "slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life".

^ "crochet does not use 1/3 more yarn than knitting".

crochetliberationfront.com.

^ "crochet for cancer".

crochet for cancer.

"crocheted ocean art to fight global warming".

^ "about the project | crochet coral reef".

www.crochetcoralreef.org.

^ "sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral.

math- and science-inspired knit and crochet.

crocheting for dummies (paperback) (2nd ed.).

"irish crochet lace", the lace maker, vol.

bennet, 1911. kooler, donna donna kooler's encyclopedia of crochet, leisure arts, inc., little rock, arkansas lambert, miss [frances].

my crochet sampler, london: john murray, albemarle street, 1844. potter, annie louise.

a living mystery: the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 4th series, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1848. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 6th series, containing d'oyleys and anti-macassars, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1877. this is the 20th printing of this book; the original publishing date is probably about 1850. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book, 9th series or third winter book, london: simpkin, marshall and co., 1850. warren, the court crochet doyley book, london: ackermann & co, 1847. wildman, emily.

step-by-step crochet, 1972 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet.

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro-hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control: national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=crochet&oldid=1149831025" categories: crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide ( top ) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1crochet hook 5 .

2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12 .

2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া catalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमर ा ठ ी မ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதம ி ழ ் türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification .

find sources : " crochet " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( march 2023 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae , see crochet ( insect anatomy ).

for the baseball pitcher , see garrett crochet .

crochet ( english : / kroʊˈʃeɪ /;[ 1 ] french : [ kʁɔʃɛ ][ 2 ]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn , thread , or strands of other materials .

[ 3 ] the name is derived from the french term crochet , meaning ' hook '.

the key difference between crochet and knitting , beyond the implements used for their production , is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun , while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time .

some variant forms of crochet , such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace , do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time .

demonstration of crochet technique etymology [ edit ] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet , a diminutive of croche , in turn from the germanic croc , both meaning " hook ".

[ 3 ] it was used in 17th - century french lace - making , where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace .

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile , and the hooked needle used to produce it .

[ 4 ] in 1567 , the tailor of mary , queen of scots , jehan de compiegne , supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet , " soye à coudre et crochetz ".

[ 5 ] origins [ edit ] 19th century crochet from orvieto , italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce , but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century .

[ 6 ] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding , a different looped yarn technique .

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823 .

this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse , of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread .

[ 7 ] the first is " simple open crochet " ( crochet simple ajour ), a mesh of chain - stitch arches .

the second ( illustrated here ) starts in a semi - open form ( demi jour ), where chain - stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip - stitch crochet , and closes with a star made with " double - crochet stitches " ( dubbelde hekelsteek : double - crochet in british terminology ; single - crochet in us ).

[ 8 ] the third purse is made entirely in double - crochet .

[ 9 ] nonetheless , the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd ' s hook , and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn .

[ 10 ] in 1844 , one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states : crochet needles , sometimes called shepherds ' hooks , are made of steel , ivory , or box - wood .

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes ...[ 11 ] two years later , the same author writes : crochet , — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland , with a small hooked needle called a shepherd ' s hook , — has , within the last seven years , aided by taste and fashion , obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature .

it derives its present name from the french ; the instrument with which it is worked being by them , from its crooked shape , termed ' crochet .'

[ 12 ] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip - stitch crochet , with u .

american terminology always using the latter ( reserving single crochet for use as noted above ).

[ 13 ] it similarly equates " double " and " french crochet ".

[ 14 ] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin , there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet .

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present - day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique .

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms .

[ 16 ] shepherd ' s hook , 19th - century tapered hook , modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd ' s hook eases the production of slip - stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time .

[ citation needed ] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd ' s - and single crochet , and the similar equivalence of french - and double crochet , there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd ' s knitting , leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively ; a distinction that is still made .

shepherd ' s hooks are still being made for local slip - stitch crochet traditions .

[ citation needed ] irish crochet [ edit ] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth , about 1970 irish crochet lace , late 19th century .

in the 19th century , as ireland was facing the great irish famine ( 1845 – 1849 ), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief [ 17 ] ( the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers ).

[ 18 ] men , women , children joined a co - operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine .

schools to teach crocheting were started .

when the irish immigrated to the americas , they were able to take with them crocheting .

[ 19 ] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet , publishing the first book of patterns in 1846 .

[ 20 ] modern practice and culture [ edit ] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s .

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era , peaking between 1910 and 1920 , became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching .

[ citation needed ] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center , 1943 .

photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared , though , and new publications called for white or pale threads , except for fancy purses , which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded .

after world war i , far fewer crochet patterns were published , and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th - century patterns .

[ citation needed ] after world war ii , from the late 1940s until the early 1960s , there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts , particularly in the united states , with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies , potholders , and other home items , along with updates of earlier publications .

the craft remained primarily a homemaker ' s art until the late 1960s and early 1970s , when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares , a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors .

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid - 20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity , the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy , as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn .

as well as books and classes , there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet .

[ 21 ] filet crochet , tunisian crochet , tapestry crochet , broomstick lace , hairpin lace , cro - hooking , and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method .

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala .

crochet table decor , kolkata , west bengal , india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well .

christopher kane ' s fall 2011 ready - to - wear collection [ 22 ] makes intensive use of the granny square , one of the most basic of crochet motifs .

in addition , crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway .

materials [ edit ] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted , most commonly yarn or thread .

yarn , one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting , has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns .

acrylic can also be used when crocheting , as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool .

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts , which can be used to make tassels , fringe , and many other items ; a pom - pom circle , used to make pom - poms ; a tape measure and a gauge measure , both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches ; a row counter ; and occasionally plastic rings , which are used for special projects .

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to " go green " and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags , old t - shirts or sheets , vcr or cassette tape , and ribbon .

[ citation needed ] crochet hook [ edit ] aluminium crochet hooks main article : crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials , such as bone , bamboo , aluminium , plastic , and steel .

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0 .

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace .

aluminium , bamboo , and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2 .

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle , while double - ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle .

while this is not in itself a hook , it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches .

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn [ edit ] main article : yarn a hank of wool yarn ( center ) is uncoiled into its basic loop .

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting .

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls , or skeins ( hanks ), although it may also be wound on spools or cones .

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

thicker yarns generally require large - diameter crochet hooks , whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks .

before use , hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center , making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for crochet , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting ; however , wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it .

[ citation needed ] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is , or braided or plied with another .

[ citation needed ] process [ edit ] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace - weight mohair yarn .

crochet tablecloth , kolkata , west bengal , india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip - knot loop on the hook ( though other methods , such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used ), pulling another loop through the first loop , and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length .

tunisian crochet , however , draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time .

like knitting , crochet can be worked either flat ( back and forth in rows ) or in the round ( in spirals , such as when making tubular pieces ).

[ citation needed ] types of stitches [ edit ] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970 .

there are six main types of basic stitches ( the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe ).

single crochet stitch ( called double crochet stitch in the uk ) – easiest stitch to master half - double crochet stitch ( called half treble stitch in the uk ) – the ' in - between ' stitch , sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch ( called treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over once ) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble ( or triple ) crochet stitch ( called double treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over twice ) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same , they differ in height and thickness .

international crochet terms and notations [ edit ] main article : list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols , abbreviations , and us / uk terms in the english - speaking crochet world , basic stitches have different names that vary by country .

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations .

in the united states , crochet terminology and sizing guidelines , as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling , are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council .

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and , if unmeasured , these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches .

in order to control for this inconsistency , printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric .

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook .

north americans call this gauge , referring to the result of these adjustments ; british crocheters speak of tension , which refers to the crafter ' s grip on the yarn while producing stitches .

[ citation needed ] differences from and similarities to knitting [ edit ] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles .

in most crochet , the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook ( with the exception being tunisian crochet ), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously .

dropped stitches , which can unravel a knitted fabric , rarely interfere with crochet work , due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet .

in knitting , each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below , whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it .

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks , the stitches above and below remain intact , and because of the complex looping of each stitch , the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed .

[ citation needed ] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook , but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double - ended needles .

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined , either by sewing or crocheting , whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric , such as entrelac .

[ citation needed ] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece .

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires .

knitting can be accomplished by machine , while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand .

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different : a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools , and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch .

[ 27 ] while most crochet is made with a hook , there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom .

[ 28 ] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting .

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off .

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits , purls , and cables , and get a similar result .

[ 29 ] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting , tends to have less " give " than knitted fabric , and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items .

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch , both made with the same size yarn and needle / hook , it is not necessarily true for crochet in general .

most crochet uses far less than 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces , and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn .

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces .

according to sources [ 30 ] claiming to have tested the 1 / 3 more yarn assertion , a single crochet stitch ( sc ) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch , but more yarn than stockinette stitch .

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric .

[ citation needed ] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric , more like knit garter stitch .

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted , provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used , but the cord ' s properties should be taken into account .

for example , lofty , thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted , which does not crush their airy structure , while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet .

[ 31 ] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time .

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools , as shown here .

unlike crochet , knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds .

charity and activism [ edit ] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war .

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals , for sick patients and also for newborn babies .

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose , such as crocheting for homeless shelters , nursing homes , etc .

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats ( commonly referred to as " chemo caps ") and donate them to cancer treatment centers , for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair .

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love , crochet for cancer ,[ 32 ] and soldiers ' angels .

in 2020 , people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches , koala mittens and wildlife nests .

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20 , 000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project .

[ 35 ] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet [ edit ] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two - dimensionally .

[ 36 ] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong , durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create .

[ 36 ] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes , in imitation of a coral reef .

[ 37 ] as hyperbolic and mathematics - based crochet has become more popular , there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists .

and sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania .

in the same section , semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more .

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture .

the following publications , explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture .

emergent explorations : analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design : the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the past few years , a practice called yarn bombing , or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings , emerged in the us and spread worldwide .

[ 41 ] styles in crochet [ edit ] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner ( c2c ) crochet see also [ edit ] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references [ edit ] ^ " crochet ".

^ " crochet ".

^ a b " crochet ".

^ lis paludan , crochet : history & technique , interweave press , loveland co , isbn 1883010098 , p .

90 – 94 ^ sarah hazell , 200 crochet stitches , search press , kent , 2013 , isbn 978 - 1 - 84448 - 963 - 3 ^ [ 2 ] elizabeth grant , the memoirs of a highland lady , john murray , london , 1898 p .

92 ^ [ 5 ] miss lambert , my crochet sampler , london , 1844 , pp .

9 – 10 ^ nancy nehring , learn slip stitch crochet , annie ' s attic , berne in , 2008 , isbn 1596352159 , p .

riego de la branchardiere , knitting , crochet , and netting , london , 1846 , p .

gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crotchet work , edinburgh , 1840 ^ [ 8 ] jane gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crochet work , 4th ed ., 1847 ^ " crochet | craft ".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010 - 06 - 01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles .

^ " crochet history - crochet guild of america ( cgoa )".

crochet .

bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star ".

^ " right type and size of a crochet hook ".

^ " crochet abbreviations master list ".

^ " standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting ".

knit or crochet - have it your way .

^ " slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life ".

^ " crochet does not use 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting ".

crochetliberationfront .

^ " crochet for cancer ".

crochet for cancer .

crocheted ocean art to fight global warming ".

^ " about the project | crochet coral reef ".

crochetcoralreef .

^ " sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral .

math - and science - inspired knit and crochet .

crocheting for dummies ( paperback ) ( 2nd ed .

irish crochet lace ", the lace maker , vol .

kooler , donna donna kooler ' s encyclopedia of crochet , leisure arts , inc ., little rock , arkansas lambert , miss [ frances ].

my crochet sampler , london : john murray , albemarle street , 1844 .

a living mystery : the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere , eléanor .

crochet book 4th series , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1848 .

crochet book 6th series , containing d ' oyleys and anti - macassars , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1877 .

crochet book , 9th series or third winter book , london : simpkin , marshall and co ., 1850 .

warren , the court crochet doyley book , london : ackermann & co , 1847 .

step - by - step crochet , 1972 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet .

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro - hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control : national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from " https :// en .

title = crochet & oldid = 1149831025 " categories : crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1crochet hook 5.2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12.1yarn bombing 12.2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাcatalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमराठीမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification.

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "crochet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (march 2023) (learn how and when to remove this template message)for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae, see crochet (insect anatomy).

for the baseball pitcher, see garrett crochet.

crochet (english: /kroʊˈʃeɪ/;[1] french: [kʁɔʃɛ][2]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn, thread, or strands of other materials.

[3] the name is derived from the french term crochet, meaning 'hook'.

the key difference between crochet and knitting, beyond the implements used for their production, is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun, while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time.

some variant forms of crochet, such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace, do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time.

demonstration of crochet technique etymology[edit] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet, a diminutive of croche, in turn from the germanic croc, both meaning "hook".

[3] it was used in 17th-century french lace-making, where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace.

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile, and the hooked needle used to produce it.

[4] in 1567, the tailor of mary, queen of scots, jehan de compiegne, supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet, "soye à coudre et crochetz".

[5] origins[edit] 19th century crochet from orvieto, italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce, but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century.

[6] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding, a different looped yarn technique.

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823. this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse, of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread.

[7] the first is "simple open crochet" (crochet simple ajour), a mesh of chain-stitch arches.

the second (illustrated here) starts in a semi-open form (demi jour), where chain-stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip-stitch crochet, and closes with a star made with "double-crochet stitches" (dubbelde hekelsteek: double-crochet in british terminology; single-crochet in us).

[8] the third purse is made entirely in double-crochet.

[9] nonetheless, the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd's hook, and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn.

[10] in 1844, one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states: crochet needles, sometimes called shepherds' hooks, are made of steel, ivory, or box-wood.

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes...[11] two years later, the same author writes: crochet, — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland, with a small hooked needle called a shepherd's hook, — has, within the last seven years, aided by taste and fashion, obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature.

it derives its present name from the french; the instrument with which it is worked being by them, from its crooked shape, termed 'crochet.'

[12] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip-stitch crochet, with u.s. american terminology always using the latter (reserving single crochet for use as noted above).

[13] it similarly equates "double" and "french crochet".

[14] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin, there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet.

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present-day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique.

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms.

[16] shepherd's hook, 19th-century tapered hook, modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd's hook eases the production of slip-stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time.

[citation needed] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd's- and single crochet, and the similar equivalence of french- and double crochet, there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd's knitting, leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively; a distinction that is still made.

shepherd's hooks are still being made for local slip-stitch crochet traditions.

[citation needed] irish crochet[edit] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth, about 1970 irish crochet lace, late 19th century.

in the 19th century, as ireland was facing the great irish famine (1845–1849), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief[17] (the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers).

[18] men, women, children joined a co-operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine.

schools to teach crocheting were started.

when the irish immigrated to the americas, they were able to take with them crocheting.

[19] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet, publishing the first book of patterns in 1846. irish lace became popular in europe and america, and was made in quantity until the first world war.

[20] modern practice and culture[edit] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s.

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era, peaking between 1910 and 1920, became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching.

[citation needed] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center, 1943. photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared, though, and new publications called for white or pale threads, except for fancy purses, which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded.

after world war i, far fewer crochet patterns were published, and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th-century patterns.

[citation needed] after world war ii, from the late 1940s until the early 1960s, there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts, particularly in the united states, with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies, potholders, and other home items, along with updates of earlier publications.

the craft remained primarily a homemaker's art until the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares, a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors.

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid-20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity, the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy, as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn.

as well as books and classes, there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet.

[21] filet crochet, tunisian crochet, tapestry crochet, broomstick lace, hairpin lace, cro-hooking, and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method.

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala.

crochet table decor, kolkata, west bengal, india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well.

christopher kane's fall 2011 ready-to-wear collection[22] makes intensive use of the granny square, one of the most basic of crochet motifs.

in addition, crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway.

materials[edit] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted, most commonly yarn or thread.

yarn, one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting, has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns.

acrylic can also be used when crocheting, as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool.

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts, which can be used to make tassels, fringe, and many other items; a pom-pom circle, used to make pom-poms; a tape measure and a gauge measure, both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches; a row counter; and occasionally plastic rings, which are used for special projects.

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to "go green" and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags, old t-shirts or sheets, vcr or cassette tape, and ribbon.

[citation needed] crochet hook[edit] aluminium crochet hooks main article: crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials, such as bone, bamboo, aluminium, plastic, and steel.

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0.4 to 3.5 millimeters, or from 00 to 16 in american sizing.

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace.

aluminium, bamboo, and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2.5 to 19 millimeters in size, or from b to s in american sizing.

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle, while double-ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle.

while this is not in itself a hook, it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches.

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn[edit] main article: yarn a hank of wool yarn (center) is uncoiled into its basic loop.

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting.

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls, or skeins (hanks), although it may also be wound on spools or cones.

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

thicker yarns generally require large-diameter crochet hooks, whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks.

before use, hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center, making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for crochet, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting; however, wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it.

[citation needed] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is, or braided or plied with another.

[citation needed] process[edit] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace-weight mohair yarn.

crochet tablecloth, kolkata, west bengal, india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip-knot loop on the hook (though other methods, such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used), pulling another loop through the first loop, and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length.

tunisian crochet, however, draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time.

like knitting, crochet can be worked either flat (back and forth in rows) or in the round (in spirals, such as when making tubular pieces).

[citation needed] types of stitches[edit] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970. there are six main types of basic stitches (the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe).

single crochet stitch (called double crochet stitch in the uk) – easiest stitch to master half-double crochet stitch (called half treble stitch in the uk) – the 'in-between' stitch, sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch (called treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over once) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble (or triple) crochet stitch (called double treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over twice) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same, they differ in height and thickness.

international crochet terms and notations[edit] main article: list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols, abbreviations, and us/uk terms in the english-speaking crochet world, basic stitches have different names that vary by country.

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations.

in the united states, crochet terminology and sizing guidelines, as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling, are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council.

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and, if unmeasured, these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches.

in order to control for this inconsistency, printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric.

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook.

north americans call this gauge, referring to the result of these adjustments; british crocheters speak of tension, which refers to the crafter's grip on the yarn while producing stitches.

[citation needed] differences from and similarities to knitting[edit] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles.

in most crochet, the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook (with the exception being tunisian crochet), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously.

dropped stitches, which can unravel a knitted fabric, rarely interfere with crochet work, due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet.

in knitting, each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below, whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it.

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks, the stitches above and below remain intact, and because of the complex looping of each stitch, the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed.

[citation needed] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook, but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double-ended needles.

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined, either by sewing or crocheting, whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric, such as entrelac.

[citation needed] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece.

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires.

knitting can be accomplished by machine, while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand.

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different: a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools, and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch.

[27] while most crochet is made with a hook, there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom.

[28] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting.

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off.

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits, purls, and cables, and get a similar result.

[29] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting, tends to have less "give" than knitted fabric, and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items.

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch, both made with the same size yarn and needle/hook, it is not necessarily true for crochet in general.

most crochet uses far less than 1/3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces, and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn.

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces.

according to sources[30] claiming to have tested the 1/3 more yarn assertion, a single crochet stitch (sc) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch, but more yarn than stockinette stitch.

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric.

[citation needed] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric, more like knit garter stitch.

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted, provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used, but the cord's properties should be taken into account.

for example, lofty, thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted, which does not crush their airy structure, while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet.

[31] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time.

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools, as shown here.

unlike crochet, knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds.

charity and activism[edit] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war.

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals, for sick patients and also for newborn babies.

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose, such as crocheting for homeless shelters, nursing homes, etc.

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats (commonly referred to as "chemo caps") and donate them to cancer treatment centers, for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair.

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love, crochet for cancer,[32] and soldiers' angels.

in 2020, people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches, koala mittens and wildlife nests.

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20,000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project.

[35] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet[edit] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two-dimensionally.

[36] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong, durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create.

[36] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes, in imitation of a coral reef.

[37] as hyperbolic and mathematics-based crochet has become more popular, there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists.

two shows were sant ocean hall at the smithsonian in washington d.c. and sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania.

in the same section, semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more.

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture.

the following publications, explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture.

emergent explorations: analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design: the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the past few years, a practice called yarn bombing, or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings, emerged in the us and spread worldwide.

[41] styles in crochet[edit] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner (c2c) crochet see also[edit] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references[edit] ^ "crochet".

^ "crochet".

^ a b "crochet".

^ lis paludan, crochet: history & technique, interweave press, loveland co, isbn 1883010098, p. 76 ^ [1] a. b. van meerten, penélopé, of, maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd, amsterdam, 1824, pp.

90–94 ^ sarah hazell, 200 crochet stitches, search press, kent, 2013, isbn 978-1-84448-963-3 ^ [2] elizabeth grant, the memoirs of a highland lady, john murray, london, 1898 p. 182.

152 ^ [4] miss lambert, hand-book of needlework, new york city, 1842, p.92 ^ [5] miss lambert, my crochet sampler, london, 1844, pp.

9–10 ^ nancy nehring, learn slip stitch crochet, annie's attic, berne in, 2008, isbn 1596352159, p. 2 ^ [6] mlle.

riego de la branchardiere, knitting, crochet, and netting, london, 1846, p.57 ^ [7] mrs. gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crotchet work, edinburgh, 1840 ^ [8] jane gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crochet work, 4th ed., 1847 ^ "crochet | craft".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010-06-01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles.

^ "crochet history - crochet guild of america (cgoa)".

www.crochet.org.

"bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star".

^ "right type and size of a crochet hook".

^ "crochet abbreviations master list".

^ "standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting".

knit or crochet - have it your way.

^ "slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life".

^ "crochet does not use 1/3 more yarn than knitting".

crochetliberationfront.com.

^ "crochet for cancer".

crochet for cancer.

"crocheted ocean art to fight global warming".

^ "about the project | crochet coral reef".

www.crochetcoralreef.org.

^ "sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral.

math- and science-inspired knit and crochet.

crocheting for dummies (paperback) (2nd ed.).

"irish crochet lace", the lace maker, vol.

bennet, 1911. kooler, donna donna kooler's encyclopedia of crochet, leisure arts, inc., little rock, arkansas lambert, miss [frances].

my crochet sampler, london: john murray, albemarle street, 1844. potter, annie louise.

a living mystery: the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 4th series, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1848. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 6th series, containing d'oyleys and anti-macassars, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1877. this is the 20th printing of this book; the original publishing date is probably about 1850. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book, 9th series or third winter book, london: simpkin, marshall and co., 1850. warren, the court crochet doyley book, london: ackermann & co, 1847. wildman, emily.

step-by-step crochet, 1972 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet.

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro-hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control: national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=crochet&oldid=1149831025" categories: crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide ( top ) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1crochet hook 5 .

2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12 .

2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া catalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमर ा ठ ी မ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதம ி ழ ் türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification .

find sources : " crochet " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( march 2023 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae , see crochet ( insect anatomy ).

for the baseball pitcher , see garrett crochet .

crochet ( english : / kroʊˈʃeɪ /;[ 1 ] french : [ kʁɔʃɛ ][ 2 ]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn , thread , or strands of other materials .

[ 3 ] the name is derived from the french term crochet , meaning ' hook '.

the key difference between crochet and knitting , beyond the implements used for their production , is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun , while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time .

some variant forms of crochet , such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace , do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time .

demonstration of crochet technique etymology [ edit ] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet , a diminutive of croche , in turn from the germanic croc , both meaning " hook ".

[ 3 ] it was used in 17th - century french lace - making , where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace .

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile , and the hooked needle used to produce it .

[ 4 ] in 1567 , the tailor of mary , queen of scots , jehan de compiegne , supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet , " soye à coudre et crochetz ".

[ 5 ] origins [ edit ] 19th century crochet from orvieto , italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce , but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century .

[ 6 ] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding , a different looped yarn technique .

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823 .

this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse , of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread .

[ 7 ] the first is " simple open crochet " ( crochet simple ajour ), a mesh of chain - stitch arches .

the second ( illustrated here ) starts in a semi - open form ( demi jour ), where chain - stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip - stitch crochet , and closes with a star made with " double - crochet stitches " ( dubbelde hekelsteek : double - crochet in british terminology ; single - crochet in us ).

[ 8 ] the third purse is made entirely in double - crochet .

[ 9 ] nonetheless , the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd ' s hook , and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn .

[ 10 ] in 1844 , one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states : crochet needles , sometimes called shepherds ' hooks , are made of steel , ivory , or box - wood .

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes ...[ 11 ] two years later , the same author writes : crochet , — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland , with a small hooked needle called a shepherd ' s hook , — has , within the last seven years , aided by taste and fashion , obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature .

it derives its present name from the french ; the instrument with which it is worked being by them , from its crooked shape , termed ' crochet .'

[ 12 ] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip - stitch crochet , with u .

american terminology always using the latter ( reserving single crochet for use as noted above ).

[ 13 ] it similarly equates " double " and " french crochet ".

[ 14 ] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin , there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet .

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present - day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique .

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms .

[ 16 ] shepherd ' s hook , 19th - century tapered hook , modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd ' s hook eases the production of slip - stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time .

[ citation needed ] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd ' s - and single crochet , and the similar equivalence of french - and double crochet , there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd ' s knitting , leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively ; a distinction that is still made .

shepherd ' s hooks are still being made for local slip - stitch crochet traditions .

[ citation needed ] irish crochet [ edit ] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth , about 1970 irish crochet lace , late 19th century .

in the 19th century , as ireland was facing the great irish famine ( 1845 – 1849 ), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief [ 17 ] ( the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers ).

[ 18 ] men , women , children joined a co - operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine .

schools to teach crocheting were started .

when the irish immigrated to the americas , they were able to take with them crocheting .

[ 19 ] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet , publishing the first book of patterns in 1846 .

[ 20 ] modern practice and culture [ edit ] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s .

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era , peaking between 1910 and 1920 , became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching .

[ citation needed ] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center , 1943 .

photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared , though , and new publications called for white or pale threads , except for fancy purses , which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded .

after world war i , far fewer crochet patterns were published , and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th - century patterns .

[ citation needed ] after world war ii , from the late 1940s until the early 1960s , there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts , particularly in the united states , with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies , potholders , and other home items , along with updates of earlier publications .

the craft remained primarily a homemaker ' s art until the late 1960s and early 1970s , when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares , a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors .

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid - 20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity , the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy , as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn .

as well as books and classes , there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet .

[ 21 ] filet crochet , tunisian crochet , tapestry crochet , broomstick lace , hairpin lace , cro - hooking , and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method .

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala .

crochet table decor , kolkata , west bengal , india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well .

christopher kane ' s fall 2011 ready - to - wear collection [ 22 ] makes intensive use of the granny square , one of the most basic of crochet motifs .

in addition , crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway .

materials [ edit ] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted , most commonly yarn or thread .

yarn , one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting , has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns .

acrylic can also be used when crocheting , as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool .

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts , which can be used to make tassels , fringe , and many other items ; a pom - pom circle , used to make pom - poms ; a tape measure and a gauge measure , both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches ; a row counter ; and occasionally plastic rings , which are used for special projects .

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to " go green " and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags , old t - shirts or sheets , vcr or cassette tape , and ribbon .

[ citation needed ] crochet hook [ edit ] aluminium crochet hooks main article : crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials , such as bone , bamboo , aluminium , plastic , and steel .

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0 .

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace .

aluminium , bamboo , and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2 .

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle , while double - ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle .

while this is not in itself a hook , it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches .

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn [ edit ] main article : yarn a hank of wool yarn ( center ) is uncoiled into its basic loop .

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting .

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls , or skeins ( hanks ), although it may also be wound on spools or cones .

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

thicker yarns generally require large - diameter crochet hooks , whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks .

before use , hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center , making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for crochet , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting ; however , wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it .

[ citation needed ] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is , or braided or plied with another .

[ citation needed ] process [ edit ] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace - weight mohair yarn .

crochet tablecloth , kolkata , west bengal , india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip - knot loop on the hook ( though other methods , such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used ), pulling another loop through the first loop , and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length .

tunisian crochet , however , draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time .

like knitting , crochet can be worked either flat ( back and forth in rows ) or in the round ( in spirals , such as when making tubular pieces ).

[ citation needed ] types of stitches [ edit ] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970 .

there are six main types of basic stitches ( the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe ).

single crochet stitch ( called double crochet stitch in the uk ) – easiest stitch to master half - double crochet stitch ( called half treble stitch in the uk ) – the ' in - between ' stitch , sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch ( called treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over once ) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble ( or triple ) crochet stitch ( called double treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over twice ) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same , they differ in height and thickness .

international crochet terms and notations [ edit ] main article : list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols , abbreviations , and us / uk terms in the english - speaking crochet world , basic stitches have different names that vary by country .

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations .

in the united states , crochet terminology and sizing guidelines , as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling , are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council .

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and , if unmeasured , these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches .

in order to control for this inconsistency , printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric .

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook .

north americans call this gauge , referring to the result of these adjustments ; british crocheters speak of tension , which refers to the crafter ' s grip on the yarn while producing stitches .

[ citation needed ] differences from and similarities to knitting [ edit ] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles .

in most crochet , the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook ( with the exception being tunisian crochet ), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously .

dropped stitches , which can unravel a knitted fabric , rarely interfere with crochet work , due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet .

in knitting , each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below , whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it .

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks , the stitches above and below remain intact , and because of the complex looping of each stitch , the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed .

[ citation needed ] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook , but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double - ended needles .

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined , either by sewing or crocheting , whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric , such as entrelac .

[ citation needed ] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece .

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires .

knitting can be accomplished by machine , while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand .

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different : a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools , and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch .

[ 27 ] while most crochet is made with a hook , there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom .

[ 28 ] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting .

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off .

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits , purls , and cables , and get a similar result .

[ 29 ] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting , tends to have less " give " than knitted fabric , and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items .

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch , both made with the same size yarn and needle / hook , it is not necessarily true for crochet in general .

most crochet uses far less than 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces , and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn .

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces .

according to sources [ 30 ] claiming to have tested the 1 / 3 more yarn assertion , a single crochet stitch ( sc ) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch , but more yarn than stockinette stitch .

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric .

[ citation needed ] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric , more like knit garter stitch .

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted , provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used , but the cord ' s properties should be taken into account .

for example , lofty , thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted , which does not crush their airy structure , while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet .

[ 31 ] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time .

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools , as shown here .

unlike crochet , knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds .

charity and activism [ edit ] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war .

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals , for sick patients and also for newborn babies .

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose , such as crocheting for homeless shelters , nursing homes , etc .

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats ( commonly referred to as " chemo caps ") and donate them to cancer treatment centers , for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair .

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love , crochet for cancer ,[ 32 ] and soldiers ' angels .

in 2020 , people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches , koala mittens and wildlife nests .

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20 , 000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project .

[ 35 ] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet [ edit ] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two - dimensionally .

[ 36 ] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong , durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create .

[ 36 ] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes , in imitation of a coral reef .

[ 37 ] as hyperbolic and mathematics - based crochet has become more popular , there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists .

and sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania .

in the same section , semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more .

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture .

the following publications , explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture .

emergent explorations : analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design : the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the past few years , a practice called yarn bombing , or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings , emerged in the us and spread worldwide .

[ 41 ] styles in crochet [ edit ] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner ( c2c ) crochet see also [ edit ] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references [ edit ] ^ " crochet ".

^ " crochet ".

^ a b " crochet ".

^ lis paludan , crochet : history & technique , interweave press , loveland co , isbn 1883010098 , p .

90 – 94 ^ sarah hazell , 200 crochet stitches , search press , kent , 2013 , isbn 978 - 1 - 84448 - 963 - 3 ^ [ 2 ] elizabeth grant , the memoirs of a highland lady , john murray , london , 1898 p .

92 ^ [ 5 ] miss lambert , my crochet sampler , london , 1844 , pp .

9 – 10 ^ nancy nehring , learn slip stitch crochet , annie ' s attic , berne in , 2008 , isbn 1596352159 , p .

riego de la branchardiere , knitting , crochet , and netting , london , 1846 , p .

gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crotchet work , edinburgh , 1840 ^ [ 8 ] jane gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crochet work , 4th ed ., 1847 ^ " crochet | craft ".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010 - 06 - 01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles .

^ " crochet history - crochet guild of america ( cgoa )".

crochet .

bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star ".

^ " right type and size of a crochet hook ".

^ " crochet abbreviations master list ".

^ " standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting ".

knit or crochet - have it your way .

^ " slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life ".

^ " crochet does not use 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting ".

crochetliberationfront .

^ " crochet for cancer ".

crochet for cancer .

crocheted ocean art to fight global warming ".

^ " about the project | crochet coral reef ".

crochetcoralreef .

^ " sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral .

math - and science - inspired knit and crochet .

crocheting for dummies ( paperback ) ( 2nd ed .

irish crochet lace ", the lace maker , vol .

kooler , donna donna kooler ' s encyclopedia of crochet , leisure arts , inc ., little rock , arkansas lambert , miss [ frances ].

my crochet sampler , london : john murray , albemarle street , 1844 .

a living mystery : the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere , eléanor .

crochet book 4th series , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1848 .

crochet book 6th series , containing d ' oyleys and anti - macassars , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1877 .

crochet book , 9th series or third winter book , london : simpkin , marshall and co ., 1850 .

warren , the court crochet doyley book , london : ackermann & co , 1847 .

step - by - step crochet , 1972 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet .

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro - hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control : national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from " https :// en .

title = crochet & oldid = 1149831025 " categories : crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

crochet - definition of crochet by the free dictionary crochet - definition of crochet by the free dictionary https://www.thefreedictionary.com/crochetprinter friendly dictionary, encyclopedia and thesaurus - the free dictionary 13,565,147,155 visits served search / page tools thefreedictionary google ?

+ add current page to bookmarks 9 register log in sign up with one click:facebooktwittergoogle share on facebook getour app dictionarythesaurusmedicaldictionarylegaldictionaryfinancialdictionaryacronymsidiomsencyclopediawikipediaencyclopedia tools a a a a language: englishespañoldeutschfrançaisitalianoالعربية中文简体polskiportuguêsnederlandsnorskελληνικήрусскийtürkçeאנגלית mobile apps: apple android for surfers: free toolbar & extensions word of the day help for webmasters: free content linking lookup box close crochet also found in: thesaurus, encyclopedia, wikipedia.

to make by looping thread with a hooked needle: crochet a sweater.n.

[french crocheter, from old french crochet, hook, diminutive of croche, feminine of croc, of germanic origin.

all rights reserved.crochet (ˈkrəʊʃeɪ; -ʃɪ) vb, -chets (-ʃeɪz; -ʃɪz) , -cheting (-ʃeɪɪŋ; -ʃɪɪŋ) or -cheted (-ʃeɪd; -ʃɪd) (knitting & sewing) to make (a piece of needlework, a garment, etc) by looping and intertwining thread with a hooked needle (crochet hook)n1.

(knitting & sewing) work made by crocheting2.

(zoology) zoology a hooklike structure of insect larvae that aids locomotion[c19: from french crochet, diminutive of croc hook, probably of scandinavian origin] ˈcrocheter ncollins english dictionary – complete and unabridged, 12th edition 2014 © harpercollins publishers 1991, 1994, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2014cro•chet (kroʊˈʃeɪ) n., v. -cheted (-ˈʃeɪd) -chet•ing (-ˈʃeɪ ɪŋ) n. 1. needlework done with a hooked needle (crochet′ hook` or crochet′ nee`dle) for drawing the thread or yarn through intertwined loops.

3. to form or work by crochet.

see crook1, -et] cro•chet′er, n. random house kernerman webster's college dictionary, © 2010 k dictionaries ltd. copyright 2005, 1997, 1991 by random house, inc. all rights reserved.crochetpast participle: crochetedgerund: crochetingimperativepresentpreteritepresent continuouspresent perfectpast continuouspast perfectfuturefuture perfectfuture continuouspresent perfect continuousfuture perfect continuouspast perfect continuousconditionalpast conditionalimperativecrochetcrochetpresenti crochetyou crochethe/she/it crochetswe crochetyou crochetthey crochetpreteritei crochetedyou crochetedhe/she/it crochetedwe crochetedyou crochetedthey crochetedpresent continuousi am crochetingyou are crochetinghe/she/it is crochetingwe are crochetingyou are crochetingthey are crochetingpresent perfecti have crochetedyou have crochetedhe/she/it has crochetedwe have crochetedyou have crochetedthey have crochetedpast continuousi was crochetingyou were crochetinghe/she/it was crochetingwe were crochetingyou were crochetingthey were crochetingpast perfecti had crochetedyou had crochetedhe/she/it had crochetedwe had crochetedyou had crochetedthey had crochetedfuturei will crochetyou will crochethe/she/it will crochetwe will crochetyou will crochetthey will crochetfuture perfecti will have crochetedyou will have crochetedhe/she/it will have crochetedwe will have crochetedyou will have crochetedthey will have crochetedfuture continuousi will be crochetingyou will be crochetinghe/she/it will be crochetingwe will be crochetingyou will be crochetingthey will be crochetingpresent perfect continuousi have been crochetingyou have been crochetinghe/she/it has been crochetingwe have been crochetingyou have been crochetingthey have been crochetingfuture perfect continuousi will have been crochetingyou will have been crochetinghe/she/it will have been crochetingwe will have been crochetingyou will have been crochetingthey will have been crochetingpast perfect continuousi had been crochetingyou had been crochetinghe/she/it had been crochetingwe had been crochetingyou had been crochetingthey had been crochetingconditionali would crochetyou would crochethe/she/it would crochetwe would crochetyou would crochetthey would crochetpast conditionali would have crochetedyou would have crochetedhe/she/it would have crochetedwe would have crochetedyou would have crochetedthey would have crochetedcollins english verb tables © harpercollins publishers 2011 thesaurusantonymsrelated wordssynonymslegend:switch to new thesaurus noun1.crochet - needlework done by interlocking looped stitches with a hooked needlecrochetingneedlecraft, needlework - a creation created or assembled by needle and threadverb1.crochet - create by looping or crocheting; "crochet a bedspread"handicraft - a craft that requires skillful handscreate from raw material, create from raw stuff - make from scratchcrochet, hook - make a piece of needlework by interlocking and looping thread with a hooked needle; "she sat there crocheting all day"shell stitch - make by shell stitchingdouble crochet, double stitch - make by double stitchingsingle crochet, single stitch - make by single stitching2.crochet - make a piece of needlework by interlocking and looping thread with a hooked needle; "she sat there crocheting all day"hookhandicraft - a craft that requires skillful handscrochet - create by looping or crocheting; "crochet a bedspread"loop, intertwine - make a loop in; "loop a rope"based on wordnet 3.0, farlex clipart collection.

© 2003-2012 princeton university, farlex inc. translationsحياكة بالصًّنّـارهيَحْبِكُ بإبْرَةيُحيك بِالأبرَه، يُصَنِّـرháčkovaná práceháčkováníháčkovathæklinghæklehäkelnhäkeleiπλέκω με βελονάκιhacer ganchillovirkatafaire du crochetkukičatihorgolhorgolásheklheklalavorare ad uncinettolavorare all’uncinettolavoro all'uncinettoかぎ針編みをする코바늘로 뜨다nėrinysnerti vąšeliutamboradatatamborēšanatamborēthakenhekleheklingszydełkowaćfazer crochéfazer crochêвязать крючкомобвязатьобвязыватьháčkovaná vecháčkovaťvirkaการถักโครเชต์dantelkroşetek tığla örgü örmektığla örmekđan bằng kim móc钩针编织品用钩针编织crochet [ˈkrəʊʃeɪ]a. n → ganchillo m, croché mb.

cpd crochet hook n → aguja f de ganchillocollins spanish dictionary - complete and unabridged 8th edition 2005 © william collins sons & co. ltd. 1971, 1988 © harpercollins publishers 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 2000, 2003, 2005crochet [ˈkrəʊʃeɪ] n → travail m au crochet vi → faire du crochet vt [+ blanket, rug] → faire au crochetcollins english/french electronic resource.

© harpercollins publishers 2005crochet n (also crochet work) → häkelei f; crochet hook → häkelnadel f; to do a lot of crochet → viel häkeln vti → häkelncollins german dictionary – complete and unabridged 7th edition 2005.

© william collins sons & co. ltd. 1980 © harpercollins publishers 1991, 1997, 1999, 2004, 2005, 2007crochet [ˈkrəʊʃeɪ]1. n → lavoro all' uncinetto2.

vt & vi → lavorare all'uncinettocollins italian dictionary 1st edition © harpercollins publishers 1995crochet (ˈkrəuʃei) , ((american) krouˈʃei) – present participle ˈcrocheting: past tense past participle ˈcrocheted – verb to knit using a single small needle with a hooked end (a crochet hook).

hekel يُحيك بِالأبرَه، يُصَنِّـر плета на една кука fazer crochê háčkovat häkeln hækle πλέκω με βελονάκι hacer croché, hacer labor de ganchillo heegeldama قلاب بافی کردن virkata faire au crochet לִסרוֹג בְּמַסרֵגָה אָחַת क्रोशिया से काढ़ना kukičati horgol renyah hekla lavorare all'uncinetto かぎ針編みする 코바늘로 뜨다 nerti vąšeliu tamboradata mengait hakenhekleszydełkować ګڼدنه یا اوبدنه fazer malha a croşeta вязать крючком háčkovať kvačkati kukičati virka ถักไหมพรม tek tığla örgü örmek 用鉤針編織 вишивати тамбуром كروشي‍ے كا كام كرنا đan bằng kim móc 用钩针编织 noun work done in this way.

she enjoys doing crochet.

hekelwerk حياكة بالصًّنّـاره плетиво на една кука crochê háčkovaná práce die häkelei hækling πλέξιμο με βελονάκι croché, ganchillo heegeldus قلاب بافی virkkuu travail au crochet סְרִיגָה בְּמַסרֵגָה אָחַת क्रोशिया का काम kukičanje horgolás rajutan hekl lavoro all'uncinetto かぎ針編み 코바늘 뜨기 nėrinys tamborēšana kait haakwerkhekling robota szydełkowa ګڼدنه croché croşetat вязанье крючком háčkovaná vec kvačkanje kukičanje virkning งานถักไหมพรม dantel, kroşe 鉤針編織品 вишивання тамбуром كروشي‍ے كا كام sự đan bằng kim móc 钩针编织品kernerman english multilingual dictionary © 2006-2013 k dictionaries ltd.crochet → يَحْبِكُ بإبْرَة háčkování hækling häkeln πλέκω με βελονάκι hacer ganchillo virkata faire du crochet kukičati lavorare all’uncinetto かぎ針編みをする 코바늘로 뜨다 haken hekle szydełkować fazer croché, fazer crochê вязать крючком virka การถักโครเชต์ tığla örmek đan bằng kim móc 钩针编织品multilingual translator © harpercollins publishers 2009 want to thank tfd for its existence?

she said, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lying on the table, she began drawing the hook out of it, without looking at vronsky.she held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at him with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.

view in contextshe wore a long cloak of some rough, dark material and a crochet shawl over her head.when he lay in bed he seemed still to see her sitting in the corner of the railway carriage, with the white crochet shawl over her head.

view in contexttom holt can crochet beautifully, but he can't make a living for his family.

view in contextdiana showed me a new fancy crochet stitch her aunt over at carmody taught her.

view in contexther little airs and graces were much admired, so were her accomplishments, for besides her drawing, she could play twelve tunes, crochet, and read french without mispronouncing more than two-thirds of the words.

view in contextshe crocheted fine edgings on the inexpensive knitted underwear she wore in winter.she crocheted yards of laces for her underwear, and made battenberg in abundance for her table and for the bureau.

view in contextknitted mufflers are much more stylish than crocheted ones this winter.

view in contextbut she told anne how many yards of lace she had recently crocheted, and the kind of weather they were having in avonlea, and how she intended to have her new dress made, and the way she felt when her head ached.

view in contexti am a jesuit, if you please to think so--a splitter of straws--a man of trifles and crochets and scruples--but you will humour me, i hope, in merciful consideration for my suspicious italian character, and my uneasy italian conscience."

▲crizzelcrmcrnacrna goracrocroagh patrickcroakcroakercroakingcroakycroatcroatiacroatiancroato-serbcroccrocanthemum canadensecrocecroce benedettocroceatecroceincroceouscrocethiacrocethia albacrocetincrochecrochetcrochet hookcrochet needlecrochet stitchcrochetedcrochetingcrochetingscrocicrociarycrocidolitecrocincrocinecrockcrock potcrock upcrockedcrockercrockerycrocketcrocketedcrocketingcrockettcrockett davidcrockfordcrockiecrockpot▼ full browser ?

▲croc tear croc tear croc tear croc tear croc-monsieur crocamander crocamander crocamander crocanthemum canadense crocanthemum canadense crocco's equation croce croce croce benedetto croce bianca val vibrata croce rossa italiana croce, benedetto croce, benedetto croceate crocein crocels croceous crocethia crocethia crocethia alba crocethia alba crocetin crocetinate croche croche crochetcrochet (music) crochet file crochet guild of america crochet hook crochet hooks crochet needle crochet stitch crochet work crochet work crocheted crocheted crocheter crocheter crocheters crocheters crocheting crocheting crochetings crochets crochets croci croci croci croci crociary crocidolite crocidolite crocidolites crocidolites crocidura ▼ facebook share twitter cite site: follow: facebook twitter rss mail share: facebook twitter linkedin mail open / close more from dictionary, thesaurus, and translations mobile apps apple android kindle windows windows phone free tools for surfers: free toolbar & extensions word of the day help for webmasters: free content linking lookup box terms of use privacy policy feedback advertise with us copyright © 2003-2023 farlex, inc disclaimer all content on this website, including dictionary, thesaurus, literature, geography, and other reference data is for informational purposes only.

crochet - definition of crochet by the free dictionary crochet - definition of crochet by the free dictionary https :// www .

com / crochetprinter friendly dictionary , encyclopedia and thesaurus - the free dictionary 13 , 565 , 147 , 155 visits served search / page tools thefreedictionary google ?

+ add current page to bookmarks 9 register log in sign up with one click : facebooktwittergoogle share on facebook getour app dictionarythesaurusmedicaldictionarylegaldictionaryfinancialdictionaryacronymsidiomsencyclopediawikipediaencyclopedia tools a a a a language : englishespañoldeutschfrançaisitalianoالعربية中文简体polskiportuguêsnederlandsnorskελληνικήрусскийtürkçeאנגלית mobile apps : apple android for surfers : free toolbar & extensions word of the day help for webmasters : free content linking lookup box close crochet also found in : thesaurus , encyclopedia , wikipedia .

to make by looping thread with a hooked needle : crochet a sweater .

[ french crocheter , from old french crochet , hook , diminutive of croche , feminine of croc , of germanic origin .]

crochet ( ˈkrəʊʃeɪ ; - ʃɪ ) vb , - chets (- ʃeɪz ; - ʃɪz ) , - cheting (- ʃeɪɪŋ ; - ʃɪɪŋ ) or - cheted (- ʃeɪd ; - ʃɪd ) ( knitting & sewing ) to make ( a piece of needlework , a garment , etc ) by looping and intertwining thread with a hooked needle ( crochet hook ) n1 .

( knitting & sewing ) work made by crocheting2 .

( zoology ) zoology a hooklike structure of insect larvae that aids locomotion [ c19 : from french crochet , diminutive of croc hook , probably of scandinavian origin ] ˈcrocheter ncollins english dictionary – complete and unabridged , 12th edition 2014 © harpercollins publishers 1991 , 1994 , 1998 , 2000 , 2003 , 2006 , 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , 2014cro • chet ( kroʊˈʃeɪ ) n ., v .

needlework done with a hooked needle ( crochet ′ hook ` or crochet ′ nee ` dle ) for drawing the thread or yarn through intertwined loops .

to form or work by crochet .

crochetpast participle : crochetedgerund : crochetingimperativepresentpreteritepresent continuouspresent perfectpast continuouspast perfectfuturefuture perfectfuture continuouspresent perfect continuousfuture perfect continuouspast perfect continuousconditionalpast conditionalimperativecrochetcrochetpresenti crochetyou crochethe / she / it crochetswe crochetyou crochetthey crochetpreteritei crochetedyou crochetedhe / she / it crochetedwe crochetedyou crochetedthey crochetedpresent continuousi am crochetingyou are crochetinghe / she / it is crochetingwe are crochetingyou are crochetingthey are crochetingpresent perfecti have crochetedyou have crochetedhe / she / it has crochetedwe have crochetedyou have crochetedthey have crochetedpast continuousi was crochetingyou were crochetinghe / she / it was crochetingwe were crochetingyou were crochetingthey were crochetingpast perfecti had crochetedyou had crochetedhe / she / it had crochetedwe had crochetedyou had crochetedthey had crochetedfuturei will crochetyou will crochethe / she / it will crochetwe will crochetyou will crochetthey will crochetfuture perfecti will have crochetedyou will have crochetedhe / she / it will have crochetedwe will have crochetedyou will have crochetedthey will have crochetedfuture continuousi will be crochetingyou will be crochetinghe / she / it will be crochetingwe will be crochetingyou will be crochetingthey will be crochetingpresent perfect continuousi have been crochetingyou have been crochetinghe / she / it has been crochetingwe have been crochetingyou have been crochetingthey have been crochetingfuture perfect continuousi will have been crochetingyou will have been crochetinghe / she / it will have been crochetingwe will have been crochetingyou will have been crochetingthey will have been crochetingpast perfect continuousi had been crochetingyou had been crochetinghe / she / it had been crochetingwe had been crochetingyou had been crochetingthey had been crochetingconditionali would crochetyou would crochethe / she / it would crochetwe would crochetyou would crochetthey would crochetpast conditionali would have crochetedyou would have crochetedhe / she / it would have crochetedwe would have crochetedyou would have crochetedthey would have crochetedcollins english verb tables © harpercollins publishers 2011 thesaurusantonymsrelated wordssynonymslegend : switch to new thesaurus noun1 .

crochet - needlework done by interlocking looped stitches with a hooked needlecrochetingneedlecraft , needlework - a creation created or assembled by needle and threadverb1 .

crochet - create by looping or crocheting ; " crochet a bedspread " handicraft - a craft that requires skillful handscreate from raw material , create from raw stuff - make from scratchcrochet , hook - make a piece of needlework by interlocking and looping thread with a hooked needle ; " she sat there crocheting all day " shell stitch - make by shell stitchingdouble crochet , double stitch - make by double stitchingsingle crochet , single stitch - make by single stitching2 .

crochet - make a piece of needlework by interlocking and looping thread with a hooked needle ; " she sat there crocheting all day " hookhandicraft - a craft that requires skillful handscrochet - create by looping or crocheting ; " crochet a bedspread " loop , intertwine - make a loop in ; " loop a rope " based on wordnet 3 .

translationsحياكة بالص ًّ ن ّ ـارهي َ ح ْ ب ِ ك ُ بإب ْ ر َ ةي ُ حيك ب ِ الأبر َ ه ، ي ُ ص َ ن ِّ ـرháčkovaná práceháčkováníháčkovathæklinghæklehäkelnhäkeleiπλέκω με βελονάκιhacer ganchillovirkatafaire du crochetkukičatihorgolhorgolásheklheklalavorare ad uncinettolavorare all ’ uncinettolavoro all ' uncinettoかぎ針編みをする코바늘로 뜨다nėrinysnerti vąšeliutamboradatatamborēšanatamborēthakenhekleheklingszydełkowaćfazer crochéfazer crochêвязать крючкомобвязатьобвязыватьháčkovaná vecháčkovaťvirkaการถ ั กโครเชต ์ dantelkroşetek tığla örgü örmektığla örmekđan bằng kim móc钩针编织品用钩针编织crochet [ ˈkrəʊʃeɪ ] a .

cpd crochet hook n → aguja f de ganchillocollins spanish dictionary - complete and unabridged 8th edition 2005 © william collins sons & co .

1971 , 1988 © harpercollins publishers 1992 , 1993 , 1996 , 1997 , 2000 , 2003 , 2005crochet [ ˈkrəʊʃeɪ ] n → travail m au crochet vi → faire du crochet vt [+ blanket , rug ] → faire au crochetcollins english / french electronic resource .

© harpercollins publishers 2005crochet n ( also crochet work ) → häkelei f ; crochet hook → häkelnadel f ; to do a lot of crochet → viel häkeln vti → häkelncollins german dictionary – complete and unabridged 7th edition 2005 .

1980 © harpercollins publishers 1991 , 1997 , 1999 , 2004 , 2005 , 2007crochet [ ˈkrəʊʃeɪ ] 1 .

vt & vi → lavorare all ' uncinettocollins italian dictionary 1st edition © harpercollins publishers 1995crochet ( ˈkrəuʃei ) , (( american ) krouˈʃei ) – present participle ˈcrocheting : past tense past participle ˈcrocheted – verb to knit using a single small needle with a hooked end ( a crochet hook ).

hekel ي ُ حيك ب ِ الأبر َ ه ، ي ُ ص َ ن ِّ ـر плета на една кука fazer crochê háčkovat häkeln hækle πλέκω με βελονάκι hacer croché , hacer labor de ganchillo heegeldama قلاب بافی کردن virkata faire au crochet ל ִ סרו ֹ ג ב ְּ מ ַ סר ֵ ג ָ ה א ָ ח ַ ת क ् र ो श ि य ा स े क ा ढ ़ न ा kukičati horgol renyah hekla lavorare all ' uncinetto かぎ針編みする 코바늘로 뜨다 nerti vąšeliu tamboradata mengait hakenhekleszydełkować ګڼدنه یا اوبدنه fazer malha a croşeta вязать крючком háčkovať kvačkati kukičati virka ถ ั กไหมพรม tek tığla örgü örmek 用鉤針編織 вишивати тамбуром كروشي ‍ ے كا كام كرنا đan bằng kim móc 用钩针编织 noun work done in this way .

she enjoys doing crochet .

hekelwerk حياكة بالص ًّ ن ّ ـاره плетиво на една кука crochê háčkovaná práce die häkelei hækling πλέξιμο με βελονάκι croché , ganchillo heegeldus قلاب بافی virkkuu travail au crochet ס ְ ר ִ יג ָ ה ב ְּ מ ַ סר ֵ ג ָ ה א ָ ח ַ ת क ् र ो श ि य ा क ा क ा म kukičanje horgolás rajutan hekl lavoro all ' uncinetto かぎ針編み 코바늘 뜨기 nėrinys tamborēšana kait haakwerkhekling robota szydełkowa ګڼدنه croché croşetat вязанье крючком háčkovaná vec kvačkanje kukičanje virkning งานถ ั กไหมพรม dantel , kroşe 鉤針編織品 вишивання тамбуром كروشي ‍ ے كا كام sự đan bằng kim móc 钩针编织品kernerman english multilingual dictionary © 2006 - 2013 k dictionaries ltd .

crochet → ي َ ح ْ ب ِ ك ُ بإب ْ ر َ ة háčkování hækling häkeln πλέκω με βελονάκι hacer ganchillo virkata faire du crochet kukičati lavorare all ’ uncinetto かぎ針編みをする 코바늘로 뜨다 haken hekle szydełkować fazer croché , fazer crochê вязать крючком virka การถ ั กโครเชต ์ tığla örmek đan bằng kim móc 钩针编织品multilingual translator © harpercollins publishers 2009 want to thank tfd for its existence ?

she said , knitting her brows ; and taking up the crochet work that was lying on the table , she began drawing the hook out of it , without looking at vronsky .

she held the work in her hands , but did not crochet , and looked at him with strange , shining , and hostile eyes .

view in contextshe wore a long cloak of some rough , dark material and a crochet shawl over her head .

when he lay in bed he seemed still to see her sitting in the corner of the railway carriage , with the white crochet shawl over her head .

view in contexttom holt can crochet beautifully , but he can ' t make a living for his family .

view in contextdiana showed me a new fancy crochet stitch her aunt over at carmody taught her .

view in contexther little airs and graces were much admired , so were her accomplishments , for besides her drawing , she could play twelve tunes , crochet , and read french without mispronouncing more than two - thirds of the words .

view in contextshe crocheted fine edgings on the inexpensive knitted underwear she wore in winter .

she crocheted yards of laces for her underwear , and made battenberg in abundance for her table and for the bureau .

view in contextknitted mufflers are much more stylish than crocheted ones this winter .

view in contextbut she told anne how many yards of lace she had recently crocheted , and the kind of weather they were having in avonlea , and how she intended to have her new dress made , and the way she felt when her head ached .

view in contexti am a jesuit , if you please to think so -- a splitter of straws -- a man of trifles and crochets and scruples -- but you will humour me , i hope , in merciful consideration for my suspicious italian character , and my uneasy italian conscience ."

▲ crizzelcrmcrnacrna goracrocroagh patrickcroakcroakercroakingcroakycroatcroatiacroatiancroato - serbcroccrocanthemum canadensecrocecroce benedettocroceatecroceincroceouscrocethiacrocethia albacrocetincrochecrochetcrochet hookcrochet needlecrochet stitchcrochetedcrochetingcrochetingscrocicrociarycrocidolitecrocincrocinecrockcrock potcrock upcrockedcrockercrockerycrocketcrocketedcrocketingcrockettcrockett davidcrockfordcrockiecrockpot ▼ full browser ?

▲ croc tear croc tear croc tear croc tear croc - monsieur crocamander crocamander crocamander crocanthemum canadense crocanthemum canadense crocco ' s equation croce croce croce benedetto croce bianca val vibrata croce rossa italiana croce , benedetto croce , benedetto croceate crocein crocels croceous crocethia crocethia crocethia alba crocethia alba crocetin crocetinate croche croche crochetcrochet ( music ) crochet file crochet guild of america crochet hook crochet hooks crochet needle crochet stitch crochet work crochet work crocheted crocheted crocheter crocheter crocheters crocheters crocheting crocheting crochetings crochets crochets croci croci croci croci crociary crocidolite crocidolite crocidolites crocidolites crocidura ▼ facebook share twitter cite site : follow : facebook twitter rss mail share : facebook twitter linkedin mail open / close more from dictionary , thesaurus , and translations mobile apps apple android kindle windows windows phone free tools for surfers : free toolbar & extensions word of the day help for webmasters : free content linking lookup box terms of use privacy policy feedback advertise with us copyright © 2003 - 2023 farlex , inc disclaimer all content on this website , including dictionary , thesaurus , literature , geography , and other reference data is for informational purposes only .

loom lore: march 2010 wednesday, march 24, 2010 granny-on-the-loom last june, i started exploring translating concentric crochet techniques on the knitting looms which resulted in several different coaster designs.

all of these designs just mimicked crochet stitches, but each one took me a little closer to what i was trying to achieve - to translate actual crochet stitches on the knitting looms.

all this resulted in the granny's rose square and a new technique i fondly call "loomchet" was born.when i first completed the granny's rose, which produced actual crochet stitches on the knitting looms, i had hoped the tutorial would be ready by last september.

(btw - the loomed granny square scarf was kelly's first experience with crochet of any kind.

as stated in the tutorial:this tutorial will show you how to make a simple granny square by incorporating two pegs on the knifty knitter looms to produce crochet stitches.

this technique is presented to you as an alternative way of crocheting for those who either never learned how to crochet or for those who experience pain when crocheting using conventional methods.

posted by brenda, domedweller at wednesday, march 24, 2010 email thisblogthis!share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest labels: crochet techniques, crochet translation, granny squares monday, march 15, 2010 shamrocks due to a number of requests on one of the loom knitting groups, i am posting this shamrock pattern.

posted by brenda, domedweller at thursday, march 04, 2010 email thisblogthis!share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest labels: easter, loom knitting, toys newer posts older posts home subscribe to: posts (atom) about me brenda, domedweller view my complete profile awards blog archive ► 2019 (1) ► june (1) ► 2018 (3) ► december (2) ► july (1) ► 2017 (3) ► october (1) ► august (2) ► 2016 (2) ► may (1) ► february (1) ► 2015 (4) ► august (1) ► may (1) ► april (1) ► march (1) ► 2014 (1) ► january (1) ► 2013 (7) ► november (2) ► october (2) ► july (1) ► april (1) ► march (1) ► 2012 (12) ► july (1) ► june (3) ► may (1) ► april (3) ► march (1) ► february (2) ► january (1) ► 2011 (15) ► december (1) ► november (2) ► october (1) ► september (1) ► july (1) ► may (2) ► april (1) ► march (2) ► february (2) ► january (2) ▼ 2010 (16) ► december (3) ► november (1) ► october (3) ► september (1) ► august (1) ► july (1) ► april (2) ▼ march (4) granny-on-the-loom shamrocks itsy eggs & bitsy bunnies jellybean basket redux ► 2009 (22) ► december (3) ► november (3) ► october (1) ► august (6) ► july (1) ► june (1) ► april (4) ► march (2) ► february (1) ► 2008 (6) ► december (1) ► november (3) ► may (1) ► february (1) ► 2007 (26) ► december (2) ► november (2) ► october (3) ► september (1) ► may (3) ► april (1) ► march (4) ► february (5) ► january (5) ► 2006 (10) ► december (5) ► november (5) i taught myself to loom knit (2011), projects by brenda myers this is an updated version of the original book which is available online and at joann's fabric & craft stores.. i taught myself to loom knit (2010), projects by brenda myers available at all walmart craft departments and online from: my projects photo album knitting projects loom stitch patterns basket lace stitch houndstooth checks ridge eyelet lace pattern box angel finger puppet august sun motif autumn skull cap baby blanket baby gran hexagon12 baby gran hexagon24 baby gran square12 baby gran square24 béla bat belle angel bitsy bunnies blossom bunny boo-ella, the ghost bright bells bright star bunnies-in-the-garden dishcloth candy canes christmas egg daffodils double hearts easter eggs falling leaves lariat felted roses fishy sachet-soap sack frankie's button bands frosty snowman hat ghost angel heartstrings hexagonal geopuffs honeycomb lace cowl honeycomb lace ornament hot lips tawashi indian corn indian corn hotpad itsy easter eggs jacko, the jack-o-lantern jellybean basket--revised 3/10 knifty christmas bells lacy pumpkin loom-inaries lacy scarflet large christmas stocking leprechaun leprechaun hat lil' punkin hat with leaf & tendril little loom-knit hearts little snowmen loomed leghorn egg cozy loomy-licious cupcakes loopy flowers love birds lovebugs mini-christmas wreaths mort, the mummy ms. kitty ms. santa towel topper my cheatin' hearts pansies patriot pin piggy finger puppet poinsettia pumpkin hat quick can koozies shamrocks short row snowflake silly santa snowflake angel snowflakes snowman tp cozy sock-it-to-me dog sweater specs the owl sunflower coasters sunflowers tea time coaster tiny tim turkey tom-tildrum, the cat tommy turkey hat towel toppers valentine angel victorian lace ornaments watermelon can/bottle koozie watermelon coasters: tutorial pattern for knitting a flat circle wendy's snood witchy-poo my techniques & videos adjustable cast on christmas stocking video tutorial drawstring cast on (alternate method) diagram by greenfuzzer drawstring cast on instructions drawstring kitchener cast on geopuff-1 (drawstring co) geopuff-2 (setup & increases) geopuff-3 (peg doubling) geopuff-4 (outer edge shaping) geopuff-5 (decreasing rows) geopuff-6 (bo & finishing) granny-on-the-loom tutorial italian tubular cast on little hearts tutorial video online resources afghan sizes blocking: how to block blocking: to block, or not... chart maker charts are your friends copyright - (a primer for knitters) copyright guidelines for crafters & hobbyists copyright theft hurts copyright: how patterns are affected crafty links - loom knitting determining yarn gauge dyeing with food color dyeing with kool aid graph paper hand felting knits how to knit needle free knitting caculators, generators, sockulators & online tools knitting graph paper knittingpatterncentral's loom knitting pattern links lkc abbreviation list loom knitting on squidoo magic formula for circles making looms (blog post link list) planned pooling random stripe generator scratchy yarn made soft seduced by beads standards & guidelines for crochet & knitting yarn calculator yarn substitution yarn yardage estimator yarndex yarn directory youtube looming videos rune songs rune songs for the 21st century by tyriel followers travel theme.

loom lore : march 2010 wednesday , march 24 , 2010 granny - on - the - loom last june , i started exploring translating concentric crochet techniques on the knitting looms which resulted in several different coaster designs .

all of these designs just mimicked crochet stitches , but each one took me a little closer to what i was trying to achieve - to translate actual crochet stitches on the knitting looms .

when i first completed the granny ' s rose , which produced actual crochet stitches on the knitting looms , i had hoped the tutorial would be ready by last september .

( btw - the loomed granny square scarf was kelly ' s first experience with crochet of any kind .)

as stated in the tutorial : this tutorial will show you how to make a simple granny square by incorporating two pegs on the knifty knitter looms to produce crochet stitches .

this technique is presented to you as an alternative way of crocheting for those who either never learned how to crochet or for those who experience pain when crocheting using conventional methods .

share to twittershare to facebookshare to pinterest labels : crochet techniques , crochet translation , granny squares monday , march 15 , 2010 shamrocks due to a number of requests on one of the loom knitting groups , i am posting this shamrock pattern .

santa towel topper my cheatin ' hearts pansies patriot pin piggy finger puppet poinsettia pumpkin hat quick can koozies shamrocks short row snowflake silly santa snowflake angel snowflakes snowman tp cozy sock - it - to - me dog sweater specs the owl sunflower coasters sunflowers tea time coaster tiny tim turkey tom - tildrum , the cat tommy turkey hat towel toppers valentine angel victorian lace ornaments watermelon can / bottle koozie watermelon coasters : tutorial pattern for knitting a flat circle wendy ' s snood witchy - poo my techniques & videos adjustable cast on christmas stocking video tutorial drawstring cast on ( alternate method ) diagram by greenfuzzer drawstring cast on instructions drawstring kitchener cast on geopuff - 1 ( drawstring co ) geopuff - 2 ( setup & increases ) geopuff - 3 ( peg doubling ) geopuff - 4 ( outer edge shaping ) geopuff - 5 ( decreasing rows ) geopuff - 6 ( bo & finishing ) granny - on - the - loom tutorial italian tubular cast on little hearts tutorial video online resources afghan sizes blocking : how to block blocking : to block , or not ... chart maker charts are your friends copyright - ( a primer for knitters ) copyright guidelines for crafters & hobbyists copyright theft hurts copyright : how patterns are affected crafty links - loom knitting determining yarn gauge dyeing with food color dyeing with kool aid graph paper hand felting knits how to knit needle free knitting caculators , generators , sockulators & online tools knitting graph paper knittingpatterncentral ' s loom knitting pattern links lkc abbreviation list loom knitting on squidoo magic formula for circles making looms ( blog post link list ) planned pooling random stripe generator scratchy yarn made soft seduced by beads standards & guidelines for crochet & knitting yarn calculator yarn substitution yarn yardage estimator yarndex yarn directory youtube looming videos rune songs rune songs for the 21st century by tyriel followers travel theme .

crocheted ocean art to fight global warming | culture | arts, music and lifestyle reporting from germany | dw | 30.01.2022 40 captures 30 jan 2022 - 01 apr 2023 dec jan nov 31 2021 2022 2023 success fail about this capture collected by organization: internet archive focused crawls are collections of frequently-updated webcrawl data from narrow (as opposed to broad or wide) web crawls, often focused on a single domain or subdomain.

collection: dw-world.de timestamps the wayback machine - https://web.archive.org/web/20220131121736/https://www.dw.com/en/crocheted-ocean-art-to-fight-global-warming/a-60428249 visit the new dw website take a look at the beta version of dw.com.

audiotrainer deutschtrainer die bienenretter german xxl german xxl deutsch aktuell deutsch im fokus telenovela bandtagebuch landeskunde community d community d das porträt podcasts & newsletter service teaching german teaching german dw im unterricht unterrichtsreihen deutschlehrer-info coronavirus world germany business science environment culture sports top stories / culture advertisement culture crocheted ocean art to fight global warming the crochet coral reef project by christine and margaret wertheim is a an art installation in which math, science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations.

crochet coral reef mixes handicrafts, environmentalism and feminism in 2005, newspapers were filled with articles about human-caused destruction of the great barrier reef, the world's largest coral reef system.

they decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them, too.

around 2005, scientists started finding that coral bleaching events, like in the great barrier reef (above), were due to ocean warming caused by humans what started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world's largest collective art and science initiative: the crochet coral reef project.

along with the wertheim sisters, more than 20,000 participants — mostly women — around the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches, creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large-scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation.

"if anyone had said to me in 2005 that i'd still be crocheting corals in 2022, i would've thought they were mad," margaret wertheim told dw.

since the project's launch, an estimated 2 million people have seen crochet coral reef in galleries and museums around the world.

crochet coral roof draws on the sisters' professional background, as well as their love for handicrafts crocheting with hyperbolic code the museum's entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals, towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye-catchingly bright colors, mirroring the vibrancy of nature.

the wertheim sisters' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritus but the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs.

corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures, which mathematicians longer thought impossible to model mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model, but in 1997, daina taimina, a mathematician at cornell university in new york, realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries: crocheting.

the crochet coral reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern, turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics.

"so there's this lovely story, that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry," said wertheim, who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens.

at its most basic, the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate.

corals are hyperbolic structures, and crocheting allows their form to be recreated she and her sister encourage contributors to "queer the code," or vary the rate of stitch increase.

what results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect, varied, diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution.

"just like there's no end to the life on earth — you know, there'll be creatures in a million years that we haven't even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that, too, and we hadn't really expected that," wertheim said.

contributors to crochet coral reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination community-based art contributed corals are combined into the satellite reefs, the crowdsourced element of crochet coral reef, yet another parallel to actual coral reefs, which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps.

in non-pandemic times, museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet.

"we always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet, which is a wonderfully expressive medium, and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now, not just some future nebulous, maybe in 100-years-time problem," wertheim said.

since 2005, over 20,000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the satellite reefs global warming has only intensified since 2005, and wertheim believes it has contributed to the project's expanding success.

while demand to show crochet coral reef has increased, as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit, its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves, wertheim explains.

www links "the beautiful math of coral" ted talk ted talk on hyperbolic geometry by margaret wertheim date 30.01.2022 author cristina burack related subjects great barrier reef, cop 26: everything you need to know, climate change keywords crochet coral reef, margaret wertheim, christine wertheim, coral reefs, great barrier reef, global warming, community art, crocheting, hyperbolic geometry, environmental art send us your feedback.

print print this page permalink https://p.dw.com/p/45y9b top stories coronavirus world germany business science environment culture sports a - z index media center live tv all media content latest programs podcasts tv schedule and reception tv programs radio learn german german courses german xxl community d teaching german about dw who we are press gmf business & sales advertising travel service reception apps & co. newsletters & co. faq contact dw akademie about us media development master's degree traineeship training © 2022 deutsche welle | privacy policy | accessibility statement | legal notice | contact | mobile version crocheted ocean art to fight global warming | culture | arts , music and lifestyle reporting from germany | dw | 30 .

com / en / crocheted - ocean - art - to - fight - global - warming / a - 60428249 visit the new dw website take a look at the beta version of dw .

audiotrainer deutschtrainer die bienenretter german xxl german xxl deutsch aktuell deutsch im fokus telenovela bandtagebuch landeskunde community d community d das porträt podcasts & newsletter service teaching german teaching german dw im unterricht unterrichtsreihen deutschlehrer - info coronavirus world germany business science environment culture sports top stories / culture advertisement culture crocheted ocean art to fight global warming the crochet coral reef project by christine and margaret wertheim is a an art installation in which math , science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations .

crochet coral reef mixes handicrafts , environmentalism and feminism in 2005 , newspapers were filled with articles about human - caused destruction of the great barrier reef , the world ' s largest coral reef system .

they decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them , too .

around 2005 , scientists started finding that coral bleaching events , like in the great barrier reef ( above ), were due to ocean warming caused by humans what started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world ' s largest collective art and science initiative : the crochet coral reef project .

along with the wertheim sisters , more than 20 , 000 participants — mostly women — around the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches , creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large - scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation . "

if anyone had said to me in 2005 that i ' d still be crocheting corals in 2022 , i would ' ve thought they were mad ," margaret wertheim told dw . "

since the project ' s launch , an estimated 2 million people have seen crochet coral reef in galleries and museums around the world .

crochet coral roof draws on the sisters ' professional background , as well as their love for handicrafts crocheting with hyperbolic code the museum ' s entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals , towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye - catchingly bright colors , mirroring the vibrancy of nature .

the wertheim sisters ' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritus but the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs .

corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures , which mathematicians longer thought impossible to model mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model , but in 1997 , daina taimina , a mathematician at cornell university in new york , realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries : crocheting .

the crochet coral reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern , turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics . "

so there ' s this lovely story , that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry ," said wertheim , who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens .

at its most basic , the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate .

corals are hyperbolic structures , and crocheting allows their form to be recreated she and her sister encourage contributors to " queer the code ," or vary the rate of stitch increase .

what results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect , varied , diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution . "

just like there ' s no end to the life on earth — you know , there ' ll be creatures in a million years that we haven ' t even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that , too , and we hadn ' t really expected that ," wertheim said .

contributors to crochet coral reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination community - based art contributed corals are combined into the satellite reefs , the crowdsourced element of crochet coral reef , yet another parallel to actual coral reefs , which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps .

in non - pandemic times , museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet .

we always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet , which is a wonderfully expressive medium , and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now , not just some future nebulous , maybe in 100 - years - time problem ," wertheim said .

since 2005 , over 20 , 000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the satellite reefs global warming has only intensified since 2005 , and wertheim believes it has contributed to the project ' s expanding success . "

while demand to show crochet coral reef has increased , as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit , its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves , wertheim explains . "

2022 author cristina burack related subjects great barrier reef , cop 26 : everything you need to know , climate change keywords crochet coral reef , margaret wertheim , christine wertheim , coral reefs , great barrier reef , global warming , community art , crocheting , hyperbolic geometry , environmental art send us your feedback .

crocheted ocean art to fight global warming – dw – 01/30/2022 you need to enable javascript to run this app.

skip to contentskip to main menuskip to more dw siteslatest videoslatest audioregionsafricaasiaeuropelatin americamiddle eastnorth americagermanytopicsclimateequalityhealthhuman rightsmigrationtechnologycategoriesbusinessscienceenvironmentculturesportslive tvlatest audiolatest videosin focusrussia's war in ukrainenuclear energychina-taiwan crisiscrochet coral reef mixes handicrafts, environmentalism and feminismimage: christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuringartsoceaniacrocheted ocean art to fight global warmingcristina burack01/30/2022january 30, 2022the crochet coral reef project by christine and margaret wertheim is a an art installation in which math, science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations.https://p.dw.com/p/45y9badvertisementin 2005, newspapers were filled with articles about human-caused destruction of the great barrier reef, the world's largest coral reef system.

they decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them, too.

around 2005, scientists started finding that coral bleaching events, like in the great barrier reef (above), were due to ocean warming caused by humansimage: david bellwood/arc centre of excellence for coral reef studies/ap/picture alliance what started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world's largest collective art and science initiative: the crochet coral reef project.

along with the wertheim sisters, more than 20,000 participants — mostly women — around the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches, creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large-scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation.

"if anyone had said to me in 2005 that i'd still be crocheting corals in 2022, i would've thought they were mad," margaret wertheim told dw.

since the project's launch, an estimated 2 million people have seen crochet coral reef in galleries and museums around the world.

crochet coral roof draws on the sisters' professional background, as well as their love for handicraftsimage: 58th international art exhibition/la biennale di venezia crocheting with hyperbolic code the museum's entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals, towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye-catchingly bright colors, mirroring the vibrancy of nature.

together, they transform the museum into a fantastic and uncannily realistic underwater landscape.the wertheim sisters' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritusimage: christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring but the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs.

corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures, which mathematicians longer thought impossible to modelimage: nyimas laula/reuters mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model, but in 1997, daina taimina, a mathematician at cornell university in new york, realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries: crocheting.

the crochet coral reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern, turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics.

"so there's this lovely story, that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry," said wertheim, who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens.

at its most basic, the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate.

"corals are hyperbolic structures, and crocheting allows their form to be recreatedimage: 58th international art exhibition/la biennale di venezia she and her sister encourage contributors to "queer the code," or vary the rate of stitch increase.

what results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect, varied, diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution.

"just like there's no end to the life on earth — you know, there'll be creatures in a million years that we haven't even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that, too, and we hadn't really expected that," wertheim said.contributors to crochet coral reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination image: christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring community-based art contributed corals are combined into the satellite reefs, the crowdsourced element of crochet coral reef, yet another parallel to actual coral reefs, which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps.

in non-pandemic times, museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet.

"we always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet, which is a wonderfully expressive medium, and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now, not just some future nebulous, maybe in 100-years-time problem," wertheim said.since 2005, over 20,000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the satellite reefsimage: christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring global warming has only intensified since 2005, and wertheim believes it has contributed to the project's expanding success.

while demand to show crochet coral reef has increased, as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit, its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves, wertheim explains.

society4 hours ago4 hours agomore from asiagermanygermany to continue development aid to maligermany to continue development aid to malipolitics3 hours ago3 hours ago03:39 minmore from germanyeuropefinland builds pilot security fence on border with russiafinland builds pilot security fence on border with russiapolitics11 hours ago11 hours ago02:44 minmore from europemiddle eastarabs embracing assad: will it help ordinary syrians?arabs embracing assad: will it help ordinary syrians?politics36 minutes ago36 minutes agomore from middle eastnorth americaus intelligence leak: what we know so farus intelligence leak: what we know so farpolitics8 hours ago8 hours agomore from north americalatin americachina sees financial upside to setting up shop in mexicochina sees financial upside to setting up shop in mexicobusiness04/11/2023april 11, 202302:30 minmore from latin americago to homepageadvertisementabout dwwho we arepressdw global media forumdw offerslearn germandw akademieservicenewslettersreceptionfaqcontacttopics from a to zb2bsales & distributiontraveladvertisingfollow us on© 2023 deutsche welleprivacy policylegal noticedigital accessibility crocheted ocean art to fight global warming – dw – 01 / 30 / 2022 you need to enable javascript to run this app .

skip to contentskip to main menuskip to more dw siteslatest videoslatest audioregionsafricaasiaeuropelatin americamiddle eastnorth americagermanytopicsclimateequalityhealthhuman rightsmigrationtechnologycategoriesbusinessscienceenvironmentculturesportslive tvlatest audiolatest videosin focusrussia ' s war in ukrainenuclear energychina - taiwan crisiscrochet coral reef mixes handicrafts , environmentalism and feminismimage : christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuringartsoceaniacrocheted ocean art to fight global warmingcristina burack01 / 30 / 2022january 30 , 2022the crochet coral reef project by christine and margaret wertheim is a an art installation in which math , science and feminism are as tightly intertwined as the wool in its creations .

they decided they had to take action — so they picked up their crochet hooks and asked others to join them , too .

around 2005 , scientists started finding that coral bleaching events , like in the great barrier reef ( above ), were due to ocean warming caused by humansimage : david bellwood / arc centre of excellence for coral reef studies / ap / picture alliance what started 17 years ago as a way to draw attention to global warming caused by human activities has grown into quite possibly the world ' s largest collective art and science initiative : the crochet coral reef project .

along with the wertheim sisters , more than 20 , 000 participants — mostly women — around the world have spent countless hours crocheting millions of stitches , creating woolly corals and other undersea creatures that the sisters then join together in a large - scale and endlessly evolving collective art installation . "

if anyone had said to me in 2005 that i ' d still be crocheting corals in 2022 , i would ' ve thought they were mad ," margaret wertheim told dw . "

since the project ' s launch , an estimated 2 million people have seen crochet coral reef in galleries and museums around the world .

crochet coral roof draws on the sisters ' professional background , as well as their love for handicraftsimage : 58th international art exhibition / la biennale di venezia crocheting with hyperbolic code the museum ' s entire exhibition space is filled with ruffled corals , towering tubular anemones and squiggly spirals in eye - catchingly bright colors , mirroring the vibrancy of nature .

the wertheim sisters ' original coral creations also incorporated materials like videotape and detritusimage : christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring but the crocheted creations bear more than just superficial resemblance to coral reefs .

corals are vibrantly colored hyperbolic structures , which mathematicians longer thought impossible to modelimage : nyimas laula / reuters mathematicians long considered hyperbolic geometry impossible to model , but in 1997 , daina taimina , a mathematician at cornell university in new york , realized that such models could be created by doing what women had been doing at home for centuries : crocheting .

the crochet coral reef uses her hyperbolic crochet code as its base pattern , turning the handicraft into a form of applied mathematics . "

so there ' s this lovely story , that underlying the making of these objects is both feminine handicraft but also knowledge about the foundations of geometry ," said wertheim , who started crocheting with her sister in her early teens .

at its most basic , the hyperbolic crochet code involves increasing stitches at a regular rate .

corals are hyperbolic structures , and crocheting allows their form to be recreatedimage : 58th international art exhibition / la biennale di venezia she and her sister encourage contributors to " queer the code ," or vary the rate of stitch increase .

what results are crocheted corals that look like corals — imperfect , varied , diverse — and that echo through production and appearance the organic creativity of evolution . "

just like there ' s no end to the life on earth — you know , there ' ll be creatures in a million years that we haven ' t even thought of now — and the crochet reef is like that , too , and we hadn ' t really expected that ," wertheim said .

contributors to crochet coral reef are given a base pattern and encouraged to use their imagination image : christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring community - based art contributed corals are combined into the satellite reefs , the crowdsourced element of crochet coral reef , yet another parallel to actual coral reefs , which are collective structures created by billions of individual coral polyps .

in non - pandemic times , museums organized open sessions where contributors would get together to crochet .

we always envisioned it as a community project that would bring people together to make lovely installations of coral reefs and through crochet , which is a wonderfully expressive medium , and that the installations would be beautiful artworks that could help bring attention to global warming and the fact that it was real and happening now , not just some future nebulous , maybe in 100 - years - time problem ," wertheim said .

since 2005 , over 20 , 000 individuals have contributed crochet creations to the satellite reefsimage : christine and margaret wertheim and the institute for figuring global warming has only intensified since 2005 , and wertheim believes it has contributed to the project ' s expanding success . "

while demand to show crochet coral reef has increased , as a community art project whose works are not sold and therefore generates no profit , its ongoing existence depends entirely upon funding — much like coral reefs themselves , wertheim explains . "

crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title.

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide (top) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5.1crochet hook 5.2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12.1yarn bombing 12.2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةবাংলাcatalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमराठीမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print/export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification.

unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "crochet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (march 2023) (learn how and when to remove this template message)for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae, see crochet (insect anatomy).

for the baseball pitcher, see garrett crochet.

crochet (english: /kroʊˈʃeɪ/;[1] french: [kʁɔʃɛ][2]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn, thread, or strands of other materials.

[3] the name is derived from the french term crochet, meaning 'hook'.

the key difference between crochet and knitting, beyond the implements used for their production, is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun, while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time.

some variant forms of crochet, such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace, do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time.

demonstration of crochet technique etymology[edit] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet, a diminutive of croche, in turn from the germanic croc, both meaning "hook".

[3] it was used in 17th-century french lace-making, where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace.

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile, and the hooked needle used to produce it.

[4] in 1567, the tailor of mary, queen of scots, jehan de compiegne, supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet, "soye à coudre et crochetz".

[5] origins[edit] 19th century crochet from orvieto, italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce, but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century.

[6] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding, a different looped yarn technique.

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823. this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse, of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread.

[7] the first is "simple open crochet" (crochet simple ajour), a mesh of chain-stitch arches.

the second (illustrated here) starts in a semi-open form (demi jour), where chain-stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip-stitch crochet, and closes with a star made with "double-crochet stitches" (dubbelde hekelsteek: double-crochet in british terminology; single-crochet in us).

[8] the third purse is made entirely in double-crochet.

[9] nonetheless, the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd's hook, and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn.

[10] in 1844, one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states: crochet needles, sometimes called shepherds' hooks, are made of steel, ivory, or box-wood.

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes...[11] two years later, the same author writes: crochet, — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland, with a small hooked needle called a shepherd's hook, — has, within the last seven years, aided by taste and fashion, obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature.

it derives its present name from the french; the instrument with which it is worked being by them, from its crooked shape, termed 'crochet.'

[12] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip-stitch crochet, with u.s. american terminology always using the latter (reserving single crochet for use as noted above).

[13] it similarly equates "double" and "french crochet".

[14] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin, there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet.

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present-day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique.

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms.

[16] shepherd's hook, 19th-century tapered hook, modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd's hook eases the production of slip-stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time.

[citation needed] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd's- and single crochet, and the similar equivalence of french- and double crochet, there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd's knitting, leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively; a distinction that is still made.

shepherd's hooks are still being made for local slip-stitch crochet traditions.

[citation needed] irish crochet[edit] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth, about 1970 irish crochet lace, late 19th century.

in the 19th century, as ireland was facing the great irish famine (1845–1849), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief[17] (the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers).

[18] men, women, children joined a co-operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine.

schools to teach crocheting were started.

when the irish immigrated to the americas, they were able to take with them crocheting.

[19] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet, publishing the first book of patterns in 1846. irish lace became popular in europe and america, and was made in quantity until the first world war.

[20] modern practice and culture[edit] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s.

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era, peaking between 1910 and 1920, became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching.

[citation needed] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center, 1943. photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared, though, and new publications called for white or pale threads, except for fancy purses, which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded.

after world war i, far fewer crochet patterns were published, and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th-century patterns.

[citation needed] after world war ii, from the late 1940s until the early 1960s, there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts, particularly in the united states, with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies, potholders, and other home items, along with updates of earlier publications.

the craft remained primarily a homemaker's art until the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares, a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors.

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid-20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity, the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy, as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn.

as well as books and classes, there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet.

[21] filet crochet, tunisian crochet, tapestry crochet, broomstick lace, hairpin lace, cro-hooking, and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method.

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala.

crochet table decor, kolkata, west bengal, india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well.

christopher kane's fall 2011 ready-to-wear collection[22] makes intensive use of the granny square, one of the most basic of crochet motifs.

in addition, crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway.

materials[edit] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted, most commonly yarn or thread.

yarn, one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting, has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns.

acrylic can also be used when crocheting, as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool.

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts, which can be used to make tassels, fringe, and many other items; a pom-pom circle, used to make pom-poms; a tape measure and a gauge measure, both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches; a row counter; and occasionally plastic rings, which are used for special projects.

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to "go green" and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags, old t-shirts or sheets, vcr or cassette tape, and ribbon.

[citation needed] crochet hook[edit] aluminium crochet hooks main article: crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials, such as bone, bamboo, aluminium, plastic, and steel.

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0.4 to 3.5 millimeters, or from 00 to 16 in american sizing.

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace.

aluminium, bamboo, and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2.5 to 19 millimeters in size, or from b to s in american sizing.

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle, while double-ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle.

while this is not in itself a hook, it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches.

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn[edit] main article: yarn a hank of wool yarn (center) is uncoiled into its basic loop.

a tie is visible at the left; after untying, the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting.

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn, producing snarls.

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls, or skeins (hanks), although it may also be wound on spools or cones.

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot.

thicker yarns generally require large-diameter crochet hooks, whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks.

before use, hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center, making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled.

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers.

of these types, wool is generally favored for crochet, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting; however, wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it.

[citation needed] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is, or braided or plied with another.

[citation needed] process[edit] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace-weight mohair yarn.

crochet tablecloth, kolkata, west bengal, india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip-knot loop on the hook (though other methods, such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used), pulling another loop through the first loop, and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length.

tunisian crochet, however, draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time.

like knitting, crochet can be worked either flat (back and forth in rows) or in the round (in spirals, such as when making tubular pieces).

[citation needed] types of stitches[edit] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970. there are six main types of basic stitches (the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe).

single crochet stitch (called double crochet stitch in the uk) – easiest stitch to master half-double crochet stitch (called half treble stitch in the uk) – the 'in-between' stitch, sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch (called treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over once) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble (or triple) crochet stitch (called double treble stitch in the uk) (yarn over twice) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same, they differ in height and thickness.

international crochet terms and notations[edit] main article: list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols, abbreviations, and us/uk terms in the english-speaking crochet world, basic stitches have different names that vary by country.

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations.

in the united states, crochet terminology and sizing guidelines, as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling, are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council.

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and, if unmeasured, these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches.

in order to control for this inconsistency, printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric.

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook.

north americans call this gauge, referring to the result of these adjustments; british crocheters speak of tension, which refers to the crafter's grip on the yarn while producing stitches.

[citation needed] differences from and similarities to knitting[edit] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles.

in most crochet, the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook (with the exception being tunisian crochet), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously.

dropped stitches, which can unravel a knitted fabric, rarely interfere with crochet work, due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet.

in knitting, each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below, whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it.

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks, the stitches above and below remain intact, and because of the complex looping of each stitch, the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed.

[citation needed] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook, but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double-ended needles.

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined, either by sewing or crocheting, whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric, such as entrelac.

[citation needed] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece.

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires.

knitting can be accomplished by machine, while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand.

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different: a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools, and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch.

[27] while most crochet is made with a hook, there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom.

[28] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting.

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off.

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits, purls, and cables, and get a similar result.

[29] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting, tends to have less "give" than knitted fabric, and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items.

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch, both made with the same size yarn and needle/hook, it is not necessarily true for crochet in general.

most crochet uses far less than 1/3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces, and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn.

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces.

according to sources[30] claiming to have tested the 1/3 more yarn assertion, a single crochet stitch (sc) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch, but more yarn than stockinette stitch.

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric.

[citation needed] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric, more like knit garter stitch.

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted, provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used, but the cord's properties should be taken into account.

for example, lofty, thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted, which does not crush their airy structure, while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet.

[31] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time.

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools, as shown here.

unlike crochet, knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds.

charity and activism[edit] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war.

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals, for sick patients and also for newborn babies.

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose, such as crocheting for homeless shelters, nursing homes, etc.

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats (commonly referred to as "chemo caps") and donate them to cancer treatment centers, for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair.

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love, crochet for cancer,[32] and soldiers' angels.

in 2020, people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches, koala mittens and wildlife nests.

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20,000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project.

[35] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet[edit] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two-dimensionally.

[36] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong, durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create.

[36] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes, in imitation of a coral reef.

[37] as hyperbolic and mathematics-based crochet has become more popular, there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists.

two shows were sant ocean hall at the smithsonian in washington d.c. and sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania.

in the same section, semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more.

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture.

the following publications, explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture.

emergent explorations: analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design: the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing[edit] main article: yarn bombing in the past few years, a practice called yarn bombing, or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings, emerged in the us and spread worldwide.

[41] styles in crochet[edit] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner (c2c) crochet see also[edit] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references[edit] ^ "crochet".

^ "crochet".

^ a b "crochet".

^ lis paludan, crochet: history & technique, interweave press, loveland co, isbn 1883010098, p. 76 ^ [1] a. b. van meerten, penélopé, of, maandwerk aan het vrouwelijk geslacht toegewijd, amsterdam, 1824, pp.

90–94 ^ sarah hazell, 200 crochet stitches, search press, kent, 2013, isbn 978-1-84448-963-3 ^ [2] elizabeth grant, the memoirs of a highland lady, john murray, london, 1898 p. 182.

152 ^ [4] miss lambert, hand-book of needlework, new york city, 1842, p.92 ^ [5] miss lambert, my crochet sampler, london, 1844, pp.

9–10 ^ nancy nehring, learn slip stitch crochet, annie's attic, berne in, 2008, isbn 1596352159, p. 2 ^ [6] mlle.

riego de la branchardiere, knitting, crochet, and netting, london, 1846, p.57 ^ [7] mrs. gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crotchet work, edinburgh, 1840 ^ [8] jane gaugain, the lady's assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting, netting and crochet work, 4th ed., 1847 ^ "crochet | craft".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010-06-01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles.

^ "crochet history - crochet guild of america (cgoa)".

www.crochet.org.

"bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star".

^ "right type and size of a crochet hook".

^ "crochet abbreviations master list".

^ "standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting".

knit or crochet - have it your way.

^ "slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life".

^ "crochet does not use 1/3 more yarn than knitting".

crochetliberationfront.com.

^ "crochet for cancer".

crochet for cancer.

"crocheted ocean art to fight global warming".

^ "about the project | crochet coral reef".

www.crochetcoralreef.org.

^ "sticks, hooks, and the mobius: knit and crochet go cerebral.

math- and science-inspired knit and crochet.

crocheting for dummies (paperback) (2nd ed.).

"irish crochet lace", the lace maker, vol.

bennet, 1911. kooler, donna donna kooler's encyclopedia of crochet, leisure arts, inc., little rock, arkansas lambert, miss [frances].

my crochet sampler, london: john murray, albemarle street, 1844. potter, annie louise.

a living mystery: the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 4th series, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1848. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book 6th series, containing d'oyleys and anti-macassars, london: simpkin, marshall, and co., 1877. this is the 20th printing of this book; the original publishing date is probably about 1850. riego de la branchardiere, eléanor.

crochet book, 9th series or third winter book, london: simpkin, marshall and co., 1850. warren, the court crochet doyley book, london: ackermann & co, 1847. wildman, emily.

step-by-step crochet, 1972 external links[edit] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet.

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro-hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner-making canvas work crocheting cross-stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace-making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning (textiles) string art tapestry tatting tie-dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier-mâché pop-up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control: national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=crochet&oldid=1149831025" categories: crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023, at 17:57 (utc).

privacy policy about wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia mobile view developers statistics cookie statement crochet - wikipedia jump to content main menu main menu move to sidebar hide navigation main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate contribute helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file languages language links are at the top of the page across from the title .

search create accountlog in personal tools create account log in pages for logged out editors learn more contributionstalk contents move to sidebar hide ( top ) 1etymology 2origins 3irish crochet 4modern practice and culture 5materials toggle materials subsection 5 .

1crochet hook 5 .

2yarn 6process 7types of stitches 8international crochet terms and notations 9differences from and similarities to knitting 10charity and activism 11mathematics and hyperbolic crochet 12architecture toggle architecture subsection 12 .

2styles in crochet 13see also 14references 15further reading 16external links toggle the table of contents toggle the table of contents crochet 49 languages afrikaansالعربيةব াং ল া catalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisह ि न ् द ी hrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaעבריתქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаlatinalëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarमर ा ठ ी မ ြ န ် မ ာ ဘ ာ သ ာ nederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskਪ ੰ ਜ ਾ ਬ ੀ polskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதம ி ழ ் türkçeукраїнськаاردو中文 edit links article talk english read edit view history tools tools move to sidebar hide actions readeditview history general what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item print / export download as pdfprintable version in other projects wikimedia commons from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia technique of creating lace or fabric from thread using a hookthis article needs additional citations for verification .

find sources : " crochet " – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor ( march 2023 ) ( learn how and when to remove this template message ) for a part of the anatomy of certain insect larvae , see crochet ( insect anatomy ).

for the baseball pitcher , see garrett crochet .

crochet ( english : / kroʊˈʃeɪ /;[ 1 ] french : [ kʁɔʃɛ ][ 2 ]) is a process of creating textiles by using a crochet hook to interlock loops of yarn , thread , or strands of other materials .

[ 3 ] the name is derived from the french term crochet , meaning ' hook '.

the key difference between crochet and knitting , beyond the implements used for their production , is that each stitch in crochet is completed before the next one is begun , while knitting keeps many stitches open at a time .

some variant forms of crochet , such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace , do keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time .

demonstration of crochet technique etymology [ edit ] the word crochet is derived from the french crochet , a diminutive of croche , in turn from the germanic croc , both meaning " hook ".

[ 3 ] it was used in 17th - century french lace - making , where the term crochetage designated a stitch used to join separate pieces of lace .

the word crochet subsequently came to describe both the specific type of textile , and the hooked needle used to produce it .

[ 4 ] in 1567 , the tailor of mary , queen of scots , jehan de compiegne , supplied her with silk thread for sewing and crochet , " soye à coudre et crochetz ".

[ 5 ] origins [ edit ] 19th century crochet from orvieto , italy knitted textiles survive from as early as the 11th century ce , but the first substantive evidence of crocheted fabric emerges in europe during the 19th century .

[ 6 ] earlier work identified as crochet was commonly made by nålebinding , a different looped yarn technique .

a crocheted purse described in 1823 in penélopé the first known published instructions for crochet explicitly using that term to describe the craft in its present sense appeared in the dutch magazine penélopé in 1823 .

this includes a colour plate showing five styles of purse , of which three were intended to be crocheted with silk thread .

[ 7 ] the first is " simple open crochet " ( crochet simple ajour ), a mesh of chain - stitch arches .

the second ( illustrated here ) starts in a semi - open form ( demi jour ), where chain - stitch arches alternate with equally long segments of slip - stitch crochet , and closes with a star made with " double - crochet stitches " ( dubbelde hekelsteek : double - crochet in british terminology ; single - crochet in us ).

[ 8 ] the third purse is made entirely in double - crochet .

[ 9 ] nonetheless , the 1833 volume of penélopé describes and illustrates a shepherd ' s hook , and recommends its use for crochet with coarser yarn .

[ 10 ] in 1844 , one of the numerous books discussing crochet that began to appear in the 1840s states : crochet needles , sometimes called shepherds ' hooks , are made of steel , ivory , or box - wood .

these instruments are to be procured of various sizes ...[ 11 ] two years later , the same author writes : crochet , — a species of knitting originally practised by the peasants in scotland , with a small hooked needle called a shepherd ' s hook , — has , within the last seven years , aided by taste and fashion , obtained the preference over all other ornamental works of a similar nature .

it derives its present name from the french ; the instrument with which it is worked being by them , from its crooked shape , termed ' crochet .'

[ 12 ] an instruction book from 1846 describes shepherd or single crochet as what in current british usage is either called single crochet or slip - stitch crochet , with u .

american terminology always using the latter ( reserving single crochet for use as noted above ).

[ 13 ] it similarly equates " double " and " french crochet ".

[ 14 ] tambour embroidery in the diderot encyclopedia notwithstanding the categorical assertion of a purely british origin , there is solid evidence of a connection between french tambour embroidery and crochet .

the tip of the needle shown there is indistinguishable from that of a present - day inline crochet hook and the chain stitch separated from a cloth support is a fundamental element of the latter technique .

the 1823 penélopé instructions unequivocally state that the tambour tool was used for crochet and the first of the 1840s instruction books uses the terms tambour and crochet as synonyms .

[ 16 ] shepherd ' s hook , 19th - century tapered hook , modern inline hook the strong taper of the shepherd ' s hook eases the production of slip - stitch crochet but is less amenable to stitches that require multiple loops on the hook at the same time .

[ citation needed ] taken with the synonymous labeling of shepherd ' s - and single crochet , and the similar equivalence of french - and double crochet , there is a strong suggestion that crochet is rooted both in tambour embroidery and shepherd ' s knitting , leading to thread and yarn crochet respectively ; a distinction that is still made .

shepherd ' s hooks are still being made for local slip - stitch crochet traditions .

[ citation needed ] irish crochet [ edit ] detail of a portuguese crocheted tablecloth , about 1970 irish crochet lace , late 19th century .

in the 19th century , as ireland was facing the great irish famine ( 1845 – 1849 ), crochet lace work was introduced as a form of famine relief [ 17 ] ( the production of crocheted lace being an alternative way of making money for impoverished irish workers ).

[ 18 ] men , women , children joined a co - operative in order to crochet and produce products to help with famine relief during the great irish famine .

schools to teach crocheting were started .

when the irish immigrated to the americas , they were able to take with them crocheting .

[ 19 ] mademoiselle riego de la branchardiere is generally credited with the invention of irish crochet , publishing the first book of patterns in 1846 .

[ 20 ] modern practice and culture [ edit ] fashions in crochet changed with the end of the victorian era in the 1890s .

crocheted laces in the new edwardian era , peaking between 1910 and 1920 , became even more elaborate in texture and complicated stitching .

[ citation needed ] filet crochet by an internee at manzanar war relocation center , 1943 .

photograph by ansel adams the strong victorian colours disappeared , though , and new publications called for white or pale threads , except for fancy purses , which were often crocheted of brightly colored silk and elaborately beaded .

after world war i , far fewer crochet patterns were published , and most of them were simplified versions of the early 20th - century patterns .

[ citation needed ] after world war ii , from the late 1940s until the early 1960s , there was a resurgence in interest in home crafts , particularly in the united states , with many new and imaginative crochet designs published for colorful doilies , potholders , and other home items , along with updates of earlier publications .

the craft remained primarily a homemaker ' s art until the late 1960s and early 1970s , when the new generation picked up on crochet and popularized granny squares , a motif worked in the round and incorporating bright colors .

detail on gold thread crochet in a mid - 20th century short jacket designed by sybil connolly although crochet underwent a subsequent decline in popularity , the early 21st century has seen a revival of interest in handcrafts and diy , as well as improvement of the quality and varieties of yarn .

as well as books and classes , there are youtube tutorials and tiktok videos to help people who may need a clearer explanation to learn how to crochet .

[ 21 ] filet crochet , tunisian crochet , tapestry crochet , broomstick lace , hairpin lace , cro - hooking , and irish crochet are all variants of the basic crochet method .

bags and hacky sack tapestry crocheted in guatemala .

crochet table decor , kolkata , west bengal , india crochet has experienced a revival on the catwalk as well .

christopher kane ' s fall 2011 ready - to - wear collection [ 22 ] makes intensive use of the granny square , one of the most basic of crochet motifs .

in addition , crochet has been utilized many times by designers on the reality show project runway .

materials [ edit ] basic materials required for crochet are a hook and some type of material that will be crocheted , most commonly yarn or thread .

yarn , one of the most commonly used materials for crocheting , has varying weights which need to be taken into consideration when following patterns .

acrylic can also be used when crocheting , as it is synthetic and an alternative for wool .

examples of such tools include cardboard cutouts , which can be used to make tassels , fringe , and many other items ; a pom - pom circle , used to make pom - poms ; a tape measure and a gauge measure , both used for measuring crocheted work and counting stitches ; a row counter ; and occasionally plastic rings , which are used for special projects .

many advanced crocheters have also incorporated recycled materials into their work in an effort to " go green " and experiment with new textures by using items such as plastic bags , old t - shirts or sheets , vcr or cassette tape , and ribbon .

[ citation needed ] crochet hook [ edit ] aluminium crochet hooks main article : crochet hook the crochet hook comes in many sizes and materials , such as bone , bamboo , aluminium , plastic , and steel .

steel crochet hooks range in size from 0 .

these hooks are used for fine crochet work such as doilies and lace .

aluminium , bamboo , and plastic crochet hooks are available from 2 .

crochet hooks used for tunisian crochet are elongated and have a stopper at the end of the handle , while double - ended crochet hooks have a hook on both ends of the handle .

while this is not in itself a hook , it is a device used in conjunction with a crochet hook to produce stitches .

see : list of united states standard crochet hook and knitting needle sizes yarn [ edit ] main article : yarn a hank of wool yarn ( center ) is uncoiled into its basic loop .

a tie is visible at the left ; after untying , the hank may be wound into a ball or balls suitable for crocheting .

crocheting from a normal hank directly is likely to tangle the yarn , producing snarls .

yarn for crochet is usually sold as balls , or skeins ( hanks ), although it may also be wound on spools or cones .

crocheters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot .

thicker yarns generally require large - diameter crochet hooks , whereas thinner yarns may be crocheted with thick or thin hooks .

before use , hanks are wound into balls in which the yarn emerges from the center , making crocheting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled .

the two possible twists of yarn although crochet may be done with ribbons , metal wire or more exotic filaments , most yarns are made by spinning fibers .

of these types , wool is generally favored for crochet , chiefly owing to its superior elasticity , warmth and ( sometimes ) felting ; however , wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it .

[ citation needed ] a single spun yarn may be crochet as is , or braided or plied with another .

[ citation needed ] process [ edit ] a close view of a crocheted scarf made with lace - weight mohair yarn .

crochet tablecloth , kolkata , west bengal , india crocheted fabric is begun by placing a slip - knot loop on the hook ( though other methods , such as a magic ring or simple folding over of the yarn may be used ), pulling another loop through the first loop , and repeating this process to create a chain of a suitable length .

tunisian crochet , however , draws all of the loops for an entire row onto a long hook before working them off one at a time .

like knitting , crochet can be worked either flat ( back and forth in rows ) or in the round ( in spirals , such as when making tubular pieces ).

[ citation needed ] types of stitches [ edit ] indian crochet white tablecloth about 1970 .

there are six main types of basic stitches ( the following description uses us crochet terminology which differs from the terminology used in the uk and europe ).

single crochet stitch ( called double crochet stitch in the uk ) – easiest stitch to master half - double crochet stitch ( called half treble stitch in the uk ) – the ' in - between ' stitch , sometimes called short double crochet in vintage publications double crochet stitch ( called treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over once ) – many uses for this unlimited use stitch treble ( or triple ) crochet stitch ( called double treble stitch in the uk ) ( yarn over twice ) while the horizontal distance covered by these basic stitches is the same , they differ in height and thickness .

international crochet terms and notations [ edit ] main article : list of crochet stitches some crochet symbols , abbreviations , and us / uk terms in the english - speaking crochet world , basic stitches have different names that vary by country .

crochet is traditionally worked off a written pattern in which stitches and placement are communicated using textual abbreviations .

in the united states , crochet terminology and sizing guidelines , as well as standards for yarn and hook labeling , are primarily regulated by the craft yarn council .

individual crocheters work yarn with a loose or a tight hold and , if unmeasured , these differences can lead to significant size changes in finished garments that have the same number of stitches .

in order to control for this inconsistency , printed crochet instructions include a standard for the number of stitches across a standard swatch of fabric .

an individual crocheter begins work by producing a test swatch and compensating for any discrepancy by changing to a smaller or larger hook .

north americans call this gauge , referring to the result of these adjustments ; british crocheters speak of tension , which refers to the crafter ' s grip on the yarn while producing stitches .

[ citation needed ] differences from and similarities to knitting [ edit ] one of the more obvious differences is that crochet uses one hook while much knitting uses two needles .

in most crochet , the artisan usually has only one live stitch on the hook ( with the exception being tunisian crochet ), while a knitter keeps an entire row of stitches active simultaneously .

dropped stitches , which can unravel a knitted fabric , rarely interfere with crochet work , due to a second structural difference between knitting and crochet .

in knitting , each stitch is supported by the corresponding stitch in the row above and it supports the corresponding stitch in the row below , whereas crochet stitches are only supported by and support the stitches on either side of it .

if a stitch in a finished crocheted item breaks , the stitches above and below remain intact , and because of the complex looping of each stitch , the stitches on either side are unlikely to come loose unless heavily stressed .

[ citation needed ] round or cylindrical patterns are simple to produce with a regular crochet hook , but cylindrical knitting requires either a set of circular needles or three to five special double - ended needles .

many crocheted items are composed of individual motifs which are then joined , either by sewing or crocheting , whereas knitting is usually composed of one fabric , such as entrelac .

[ citation needed ] freeform crochet is a technique that can create interesting shapes in three dimensions because new stitches can be made independently of previous stitches almost anywhere in the crocheted piece .

it is generally accomplished by building shapes or structural elements onto existing crocheted fabric at any place the crafter desires .

knitting can be accomplished by machine , while many crochet stitches can only be crafted by hand .

the height of knitted and crocheted stitches is also different : a single crochet stitch is twice the height of a knit stitch in the same yarn size and comparable diameter tools , and a double crochet stitch is about four times the height of a knit stitch .

[ 27 ] while most crochet is made with a hook , there is also a method of crocheting with a knitting loom .

[ 28 ] slip stitch crochet is very similar to knitting .

each stitch in slip stitch crochet is formed the same way as a knit or purl stitch which is then bound off .

a person working in slip stitch crochet can follow a knitted pattern with knits , purls , and cables , and get a similar result .

[ 29 ] it is a common perception that crochet produces a thicker fabric than knitting , tends to have less " give " than knitted fabric , and uses approximately a third more yarn for a comparable project than knitted items .

although this is true when comparing a single crochet swatch with a stockinette swatch , both made with the same size yarn and needle / hook , it is not necessarily true for crochet in general .

most crochet uses far less than 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting for comparable pieces , and a crocheter can get similar feel and drape to knitting by using a larger hook or thinner yarn .

tunisian crochet and slip stitch crochet can in some cases use less yarn than knitting for comparable pieces .

according to sources [ 30 ] claiming to have tested the 1 / 3 more yarn assertion , a single crochet stitch ( sc ) uses approximately the same amount of yarn as knit garter stitch , but more yarn than stockinette stitch .

any stitch using yarnovers uses less yarn than single crochet to produce the same amount of fabric .

[ citation needed ] standard crochet stitches like sc and dc also produce a thicker fabric , more like knit garter stitch .

any yarn can be either knitted or crocheted , provided needles or hooks of the correct size are used , but the cord ' s properties should be taken into account .

for example , lofty , thick woolen yarns tend to function better when knitted , which does not crush their airy structure , while thin and tightly spun yarn helps to achieve the firm texture required for amigurumi crochet .

[ 31 ] differences between crochet and knitting most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time .

crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools , as shown here .

unlike crochet , knitting requires specialized needles to create circular rounds .

charity and activism [ edit ] it has been very common for people and groups to crochet clothing and other garments and then donate them to soldiers during war .

people have also crocheted clothing and then donated it to hospitals , for sick patients and also for newborn babies .

sometimes groups will crochet for a specific charity purpose , such as crocheting for homeless shelters , nursing homes , etc .

it is becoming increasingly popular to crochet hats ( commonly referred to as " chemo caps ") and donate them to cancer treatment centers , for those undergoing chemotherapy and therefore losing hair .

organizations dedicated to using crochet as a way to help others include knots of love , crochet for cancer ,[ 32 ] and soldiers ' angels .

in 2020 , people around the world banded together to help save the wildlife affected by the australian bushfires by crocheting kangaroo pouches , koala mittens and wildlife nests .

a group started in 2005 to create crochet versions of coral reefs grew by 2022 to over 20 , 000 contributors in what became the crochet coral reef project .

[ 35 ] mathematics and hyperbolic crochet [ edit ] crochet has been used to illustrate shapes in hyperbolic space that are difficult to reproduce using other media or are difficult to understand when viewed two - dimensionally .

[ 36 ] mathematician daina taimiņa first used crochet in 1997 to create strong , durable models of hyperbolic space after finding paper models were delicate and hard to create .

[ 36 ] a collection of crocheted hyperbolic planes , in imitation of a coral reef .

[ 37 ] as hyperbolic and mathematics - based crochet has become more popular , there have been several events highlighting work from various fiber artists .

and sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral at lafayette college in pennsylvania .

in the same section , semper confesses his ignorance of the subject of crochet but believes strongly that it is a technique of great value as a textile technique and possibly something more .

there are a small number of architects currently interested in the subject of crochet as it relates to architecture .

the following publications , explorations and thesis projects can be used as a resource to see how crochet is being used within the capacity of architecture .

emergent explorations : analog and digital scripting - alexander worden research and design : the architecture of variation - lars spuybroek yurtalert - kate pokorny yarn bombing [ edit ] main article : yarn bombing in the past few years , a practice called yarn bombing , or the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one ' s ( usually outdoor ) surroundings , emerged in the us and spread worldwide .

[ 41 ] styles in crochet [ edit ] mosaic crochet granny square freeform crochet motifs crocheted lace tunisian crochet tapestry crochet amigurumi filet crochet corner to corner ( c2c ) crochet see also [ edit ] crochet guild of america the tempestry project fiber art macramé knitting references [ edit ] ^ " crochet ".

^ " crochet ".

^ a b " crochet ".

^ lis paludan , crochet : history & technique , interweave press , loveland co , isbn 1883010098 , p .

90 – 94 ^ sarah hazell , 200 crochet stitches , search press , kent , 2013 , isbn 978 - 1 - 84448 - 963 - 3 ^ [ 2 ] elizabeth grant , the memoirs of a highland lady , john murray , london , 1898 p .

92 ^ [ 5 ] miss lambert , my crochet sampler , london , 1844 , pp .

9 – 10 ^ nancy nehring , learn slip stitch crochet , annie ' s attic , berne in , 2008 , isbn 1596352159 , p .

riego de la branchardiere , knitting , crochet , and netting , london , 1846 , p .

gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crotchet work , edinburgh , 1840 ^ [ 8 ] jane gaugain , the lady ' s assistant for executing useful and fancy designs in knitting , netting and crochet work , 4th ed ., 1847 ^ " crochet | craft ".

^ irish crochet lace exhibit catalog archived 2010 - 06 - 01 at the wayback machine lacis museum of lace and textiles .

^ " crochet history - crochet guild of america ( cgoa )".

crochet .

bettendorf crochet expert is a you tube star ".

^ " right type and size of a crochet hook ".

^ " crochet abbreviations master list ".

^ " standards and guidelines for crochet and knitting ".

knit or crochet - have it your way .

^ " slip stitch crochet « a yarnified life ".

^ " crochet does not use 1 / 3 more yarn than knitting ".

crochetliberationfront .

^ " crochet for cancer ".

crochet for cancer .

crocheted ocean art to fight global warming ".

^ " about the project | crochet coral reef ".

crochetcoralreef .

^ " sticks , hooks , and the mobius : knit and crochet go cerebral .

math - and science - inspired knit and crochet .

crocheting for dummies ( paperback ) ( 2nd ed .

irish crochet lace ", the lace maker , vol .

kooler , donna donna kooler ' s encyclopedia of crochet , leisure arts , inc ., little rock , arkansas lambert , miss [ frances ].

my crochet sampler , london : john murray , albemarle street , 1844 .

a living mystery : the international art & history of crochet riego de la branchardiere , eléanor .

crochet book 4th series , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1848 .

crochet book 6th series , containing d ' oyleys and anti - macassars , london : simpkin , marshall , and co ., 1877 .

crochet book , 9th series or third winter book , london : simpkin , marshall and co ., 1850 .

warren , the court crochet doyley book , london : ackermann & co , 1847 .

step - by - step crochet , 1972 external links [ edit ] wikimedia commons has media related to crochet .

the antique pattern library vtecrochettools crochet hook cro - hook hook gauge list of yarns for crochet and knitting scissors stitch marker techniques and motifs bead crochet blocking gauge granny square list of crochet stitches shell stitch tapestry crochet tunisian crochet items amigurumi noken or bilum doily crocheted lace broomstick lace crocheted lace filet crochet hairpin lace irish crochet related crochet thread dye lot yarn vtetextile artsfundamentals appliqué beadwork crochet dyeing embroidery fabric felting fiber knitting lace macramé nålebinding needlework patchwork passementerie plying quilting rope rug making sewing spinning stitch textile printing weaving yarn history of ... byzantine silk clothing and textiles silk quilting silk in the indian subcontinent textile manufacturing by pre - industrial methods textiles in the british industrial revolution timeline of textile technology regional and ethnic african andean australian aboriginal hmong burmese acheik indonesian balinese sumba indigenous peoples of the americas kongo korean kuba māori mapuche maya mexican navajo oaxacan related blocking fiber art mathematics and fiber arts manufacturing preservation recycling textile industry textile museums units of measurement wearable fiber art glossaries dyeing terms sewing terms textile manufacturing terms clothing portal vtedecorative arts and handicrafts history textile banner - making canvas work crocheting cross - stitch embroidery felting friendship bracelet knitting lace - making lucet macrame millinery needlepoint needlework patchwork quilting ribbon embroidery rug hooking rug making sewing shoemaking spinning ( textiles ) string art tapestry tatting tie - dye weaving paper altered book bookbinding calligraphy cardmaking cast paper collage decoupage papier collé photomontage iris folding jianzhi kamikiri origami kirigami moneygami embossing marbling papercraft papercutting chinese jewish slavic papermaking paper toys papier - mâché pop - up book quilling scrapbooking stamping wallpaper wood bentwood cabinetry carpentry chip carving ébéniste fretwork intarsia marquetry wood burning wood carving woodturning ceramic azulejo bone china earthenware porcelain pottery stoneware terracotta glass cameo glass enamelled glass glass etching glassware stained glass chip work metal chemical milling enamel engraving etching jewellery goldsmith silversmith bronze and brass ornamental work ironwork other assemblage balloon modelling beadwork bone carving doll making dollhouse egg decorating engraved gems faux painting grotesque gargoyle hardstone carving lath art lapidary leatherworking miniatures micromosaic mosaic glass mosaic ornament pargeting pietra dura private press pressed flower craft qing handicrafts scrimshaw straw marquetry wall decal authority control : national france bnf data germany israel united states czech republic retrieved from " https :// en .

title = crochet & oldid = 1149831025 " categories : crochetcraftsfigured fabricsneedleworkhidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionshort description matches wikidataarticles needing additional references from march 2023all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2023articles with unsourced statements from october 2022wikipedia articles needing clarification from october 2022commons category link is on wikidataarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with bnfdata identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles containing video clips this page was last edited on 14 april 2023 , at 17 : 57 ( utc ).

